in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
and the earth was without form and void and darkness was
upon the face of the deep. and the spirit of God moved upon
the face of the waters.
and God said let there be light and there was light.
and God saw the light that it was good and God divided the
light from the darkness.
and God called the light day and the darkness he called
night. and the evening and the morning were the first day.
and God said let there be a firmament in the midst of the
waters and let it divide the waters from the waters.
and God made the firmament and divided the waters which were
under the firmament from the waters which were above the
firmament and it was so.
and God called the firmament heaven. and the evening and the
morning were the second day.
and God said let the waters under the heaven be gathered
together unto one place and let the dry land appear and it
was so.
and God called the dry land earth and the gathering together
of the waters called he seas and God saw that it was good.
and God said let the earth bring forth grass the herb
yielding seed and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his
kind whose seed is in itself upon the earth and it was so.
and the earth brought forth grass and herb yielding seed
after his kind and the tree yielding fruit whose seed was in
itself after his kind and God saw that it was good.
and the evening and the morning were the third day.
and God said let there be lights in the firmament of the
heaven to divide the day from the night and let them be for
signs and for seasons and for days and years
and let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to
give light upon the earth and it was so.
and God made two great lights the greater light to rule the
day and the lesser light to rule the night he made the stars
also.
and God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light
upon the earth
and to rule over the day and over the night and to divide the
light from the darkness and God saw that it was good.
and the evening and the morning were the fourth day.
and God said let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving
creature that hath life and fowl that may fly above the earth
in the open firmament of heaven.
and God created great whales and every living creature that
moveth which the waters brought forth abundantly after their
kind and every winged fowl after his kind and God saw that
it was good.
and God blessed them saying be fruitful and multiply and
fill the waters in the seas and let fowl multiply in the
earth.
and the evening and the morning were the fifth day.
and God said let the earth bring forth the living creature
after his kind cattle and creeping thing and beast of the
earth after his kind and it was so.
and God made the beast of the earth after his kind and cattle
after their kind and every thing that creepeth upon the earth
after his kind and God saw that it was good.
and God said let us make man in our image after our
likeness and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea
and over the fowl of the air and over the cattle and over
all the earth and over every creeping thing that creepeth
upon the earth.
so God created man in his own image in the image of God
created he him Male and female created he them.
and God blessed them and God said unto them be fruitful and
multiply and replenish the earth and subdue it and have
dominion over the fish of the sea and over the fowl of the
air and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.
and God said behold I have given you every herb bearing
seed which is upon the face of all the earth and every tree
in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed to you it
shall be for meat.
and to every beast of the earth and to every fowl of the air
and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth wherein there
is life I have given every green herb for meat and it was
so.
and God saw every thing that he had made and behold it was
very good. and the evening and the morning were the sixth day.
thus the heavens and the earth were finished and all the host
of them.
and on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made
and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he
had made.
and God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it because
that in it he had rested from all his work which God created
and made.
these are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when
they were created in the day that the lord God made the earth
and the heavens
and every plant of the field before it was in the earth and
every herb of the field before it grew for the lord God had
not caused it to rain upon the earth and there was not a man
to till the ground.
but there went up a mist from the earth and watered the whole
face of the ground.
and the lord God formed man of the dust of the ground and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life and man became
a living soul.
and the lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden and there
he put the man whom he had formed.
and out of the ground made the lord God to grow every tree
that is pleasant to the sight and good for food the tree of
life also in the midst of the garden and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil.
and a river went out of Eden to water the garden and from
thence it was parted and became into four heads.
the name of the first is Pison that is it which compasseth
the whole land of Havilah where there is gold
and the gold of that land is good there is bdellium and the
Onyx stone.
and the name of the second river is Gihon the same is it that
compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.
and the name of the third river is Hiddekel that is it which
goeth toward the east of Assyria. and the fourth river is
Euphrates.
and the lord God took the man and put him into the garden of
Eden to dress it and to keep it.
and the lord God commanded the man saying of every tree of
the garden thou mayest freely eat
but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shalt
not eat of it for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shalt surely die.
and the lord God said it is not good that the man should be
alone I will make him an help meet for him.
and out of the ground the lord God formed every beast of the
field and every fowl of the air and brought them unto Adam
to see what he would call them and whatsoever Adam called
every living creature that was the name thereof.
and Adam gave names to all cattle and to the fowl of the air
and to every beast of the field but for Adam there was not
found an help meet for him.
and the lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam and he
slept and he took one of his ribs and closed up the flesh
instead thereof
and the rib which the lord God had taken from man made he a
woman and brought her unto the man.
and Adam said this is now bone of my bones and flesh of my
flesh she shall be called woman because she was taken out of
man.
therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother and
shall cleave unto his wife and they shall be one flesh.
and they were both naked the man and his wife and were not
ashamed.
now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field
which the lord God had made. and he said unto the woman yea
hath God said ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
and the woman said unto the serpent we may eat of the fruit
of the trees of the garden
but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the
garden God hath said ye shall not eat of it Neither shall
ye touch it lest ye die.
and the serpent said unto the woman ye shall not surely die
for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof then your
eyes shall be opened and ye shall be as gods knowing good
and evil.
and when the woman saw that the tree was good for food and
that it was pleasant to the eyes and a tree to be desired to
make one wise she took of the fruit thereof and did eat and
gave also unto her husband with her and he did eat.
and the eyes of them both were opened and they knew that they
were naked and they sewed fig leaves together and made
themselves aprons.
and they heard the voice of the lord God walking in the garden
in the cool of the day and Adam and his wife hid themselves
from the presence of the lord God amongst the trees of the
garden.
and the lord God called unto Adam and said unto him where
art thou?
and he said I heard thy voice in the garden and I was
afraid because I was naked and I hid myself.
and he said who told thee that thou wast naked? hast thou
eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou
shouldest not eat?
and the man said the woman whom thou Gavest to be with me
she gave me of the tree and I did eat.
and the lord God said unto the woman what is this that thou
hast done? and the woman said the serpent beguiled me and I
did eat.
and the lord God said unto the serpent because thou hast done
this thou art cursed above all cattle and above every beast
of the field upon thy belly shalt thou go and dust shalt
thou eat all the days of thy life
and I will put enmity between thee and the woman and between
thy seed and her seed it shall bruise thy head and thou
shalt bruise his heel.
unto the woman he said I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and
thy conception in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children and
thy desire shall be to thy husband and he shall rule over
thee.
and unto Adam he said because thou hast hearkened unto the
voice of thy wife and hast eaten of the tree of which I
commanded thee saying thou shalt not eat of it cursed is
the ground for thy sake in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all
the days of thy life
thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee and
thou shalt eat the herb of the field
in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou
return unto the ground for out of it wast thou taken for
dust thou art and unto dust shalt thou return.
and Adam called his wife s name Eve because she was the
mother of all living.
unto Adam also and to his wife did the lord God make coats of
skins and clothed them.
and the lord God said behold the man is become as one of us
to know good and evil and now lest he put forth his hand
and take also of the tree of life and eat and live for ever
therefore the lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden
to till the ground from whence he was taken.
so he drove out the man and he placed at the east of the
garden of Eden Cherubims and a flaming sword which turned
every way to keep the way of the tree of life.
and Adam knew Eve his wife and she conceived and bare Cain
and said I have gotten a man from the lord.
and she again bare his brother Abel. and Abel was a keeper of
sheep but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
and in process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of
the fruit of the ground an offering unto the lord.
and Abel he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and
of the fat thereof. and the lord had respect unto Abel and to
his offering
but unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. and Cain
was very wroth and his countenance fell.
and the lord said unto Cain why art thou wroth? and why is
thy countenance fallen?
if thou doest well shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou
doest not well Sin lieth at the door. and unto thee shall be
his desire and thou shalt rule over him.
and Cain talked with Abel his brother and it came to pass
when they were in the field that Cain rose up against Abel
his brother and slew him.
and the lord said unto Cain where is Abel thy brother? and he
said I know not Am I my brother s keeper?
and he said what hast thou done? the voice of thy brother s
blood crieth unto me from the ground.
and now art thou cursed from the earth which hath opened her
mouth to receive thy brother s blood from thy hand
when thou tillest the ground it shall not henceforth yield
unto thee her strength a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou
be in the earth.
and Cain said unto the lord my punishment is greater than I
can bear.
behold thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the
earth and from thy face shall I be hid and I shall be a
fugitive and a vagabond in the earth and it shall come to
pass that every one that findeth me shall slay me.
and the lord said unto him therefore whosoever slayeth Cain
vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. and the lord set a
Mark upon Cain lest any finding him should kill him.
and Cain went out from the presence of the lord and dwelt in
the land of Nod on the east of Eden.
and Cain knew his wife and she conceived and bare Enoch and
he builded a city and called the name of the city after the
name of his son Enoch.
and unto Enoch was born Irad and Irad begat Mehujael and
Mehujael begat Methusael and Methusael begat Lamech.
and Lamech took unto him two wives the name of the one was
Adah and the name of the other Zillah.
and Adah bare Jabal he was the father of such as dwell in
tents and of such as have cattle.
and his brother s name was Jubal he was the father of all
such as handle the harp and organ.
and Zillah she also bare Tubalcain an instructor of every
artificer in brass and Iron and the sister of Tubalcain was
Naamah.
and Lamech said unto his wives Adah and Zillah hear my
voice ye wives of Lamech hearken unto my speech for I have
slain a man to my wounding and a young man to my hurt.
if Cain shall be avenged sevenfold truly Lamech seventy and
sevenfold.
and Adam knew his wife again and she bare a son and called
his name Seth for God said she hath appointed me another
seed instead of Abel whom Cain slew.
and to Seth to him also there was born a son and he called
his name Enos then began men to call upon the name of the
lord.
this is the book of the generations of Adam. in the day that
God created man in the likeness of God made he him
Male and female created he them and blessed them and called
their name Adam in the day when they were created.
and Adam lived an hundred and thirty years and begat a son in
his own likeness and after his image and called his name
Seth
and the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight
hundred years and he begat sons and daughters
and all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty
years and he died.
and Seth lived an hundred and five years and begat Enos
and Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven
years and begat sons and daughters
and all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years
and he died.
and Enos lived ninety years and begat Cainan
and Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen
years and begat sons and daughters
and all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years and
he died.
and Cainan lived seventy years and begat Mahalaleel
and Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and
forty years and begat sons and daughters
and all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and Ten years
and he died.
and Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years and begat Jared
and Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and
thirty years and begat sons and daughters
and all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and
five years and he died.
and Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years and he begat
Enoch
and Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years and
begat sons and daughters
and all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two
years and he died.
and Enoch lived sixty and five years and begat Methuselah
and Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three
hundred years and begat sons and daughters
and all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five
years
and Enoch walked with God and he was not for God took him.
and Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years and
begat Lamech.
and Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred
eighty and two years and begat sons and daughters
and all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and
nine years and he died.
and Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years and begat a
son
and he called his name Noah saying this same shall comfort
us concerning our work and toil of our hands because of the
ground which the lord hath cursed.
and Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and
five years and begat sons and daughters
and all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and
seven years and he died.
and Noah was five hundred years old and Noah begat Shem Ham
and Japheth.
and it came to pass when men began to multiply on the face of
the earth and daughters were born unto them
that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were
fair and they took them wives of all which they chose.
and the lord said my spirit shall not always strive with man
for that he also is flesh yet his days shall be an hundred
and twenty years.
there were giants in the earth in those days and also after
that when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men
and they bare children to them the same became Mighty men
which were of old men of renown.
and God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was
only evil continually.
and it repented the lord that he had made man on the earth
and it grieved him at his heart.
and the lord said I will destroy man whom I have created from
the face of the earth both man and beast and the creeping
thing and the fowls of the air for it repenteth me that I
have made them.
but Noah found grace in the eyes of the lord.
these are the generations of Noah Noah was a just man and
perfect in his generations and Noah walked with God.
and Noah begat three sons Shem Ham and Japheth.
the earth also was corrupt before God and the earth was
filled with violence.
and God looked upon the earth and behold it was corrupt
for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.
and God said unto Noah the end of all flesh is come before
me for the earth is filled with violence through them and
behold I will destroy them with the earth.
make thee an ark of gopher wood rooms shalt thou make in the
ark and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.
and this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of the
length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits the breadth
of it fifty cubits and the height of it thirty cubits.
a window shalt thou make to the ark and in a cubit shalt thou
finish it above and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the
side thereof with lower second and third stories shalt thou
make it.
and behold I even I do bring a flood of waters upon the
earth to destroy all flesh wherein is the breath of life
from under heaven and every thing that is in the earth shall
die.
but with thee will I establish my covenant and thou shalt
come into the ark thou and thy sons and thy wife and thy
sons wives with thee.
and of every living thing of all flesh two of every sort
shalt thou bring into the ark to keep them alive with thee
they shall be Male and female.
of fowls after their kind and of cattle after their kind of
every creeping thing of the earth after his kind two of every
sort shall come unto thee to keep them alive.
and take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten and thou
shalt gather it to thee and it shall be for food for thee
and for them.
thus did Noah according to all that God commanded him so did
he.
and the lord said unto Noah come thou and all thy house into
the ark for thee have I seen righteous before me in this
generation.
of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens the
Male and his female and of beasts that are not clean by two
the Male and his female.
of fowls also of the air by sevens the Male and the female
to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.
for yet seven days and I will cause it to rain upon the earth
forty days and forty nights and every living substance that I
have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.
and Noah did according unto all that the lord commanded him.
and Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters
was upon the earth.
and Noah went in and his sons and his wife and his sons
wives with him into the ark because of the waters of the
flood.
of clean beasts and of beasts that are not clean and of
fowls and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth
there went in two and two unto Noah into the ark the Male and
the female as God had commanded Noah.
and it came to pass after seven days that the waters of the
flood were upon the earth.
in the six hundredth year of Noah s life in the second month
the seventeenth day of the month the same day were all the
fountains of the great deep broken up and the windows of
heaven were opened.
and the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
in the selfsame day entered Noah and Shem and Ham and
Japheth the sons of Noah and Noah s wife and the three
wives of his sons with them into the ark
they and every beast after his kind and all the cattle after
their kind and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the
earth after his kind and every fowl after his kind every
bird of every sort.
and they went in unto Noah into the ark two and two of all
flesh wherein is the breath of life.
and they that went in went in Male and female of all flesh
as God had commanded him and the lord shut him in.
and the flood was forty days upon the earth and the waters
increased and bare up the ark and it was lift up above the
earth.
and the waters prevailed and were increased greatly upon the
earth and the ark went upon the face of the waters.
and the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth and all
the high hills that were under the whole heaven were
covered.
fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail and the
mountains were covered.
and all flesh died that moved upon the earth both of fowl
and of cattle and of beast and of every creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth and every man
all in whose nostrils was the breath of life of all that was
in the dry land died.
and every living substance was destroyed which was upon the
face of the ground both man and cattle and the creeping
things and the fowl of the heaven and they were destroyed
from the earth and Noah only remained alive and they that
were with him in the ark.
and the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty
days.
and God remembered Noah and every living thing and all the
cattle that was with him in the ark and God made a wind to
pass over the earth and the waters asswaged
the fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were
stopped and the rain from heaven was restrained
and the waters returned from off the earth continually and
after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were
abated.
and the ark rested in the seventh month on the seventeenth
day of the month upon the mountains of Ararat.
and the waters decreased continually until the tenth month in
the tenth month on the first day of the month were the tops
of the mountains seen.
and it came to pass at the end of forty days that Noah opened
the window of the ark which he had made
and he sent forth a raven which went forth to and fro until
the waters were dried up from off the earth.
also he sent forth a dove from him to see if the waters were
abated from off the face of the ground
but the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot and she
returned unto him into the ark for the waters were on the
face of the whole earth then he put forth his hand and took
her and pulled her in unto him into the ark.
and he stayed yet other seven days and again he sent forth
the dove out of the ark
and the dove came in to him in the evening and lo in her
mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off so Noah knew that the
waters were abated from off the earth.
and he stayed yet other seven days and sent forth the dove
which returned not again unto him any more.
and it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year in
the first month the first day of the month the waters were
dried up from off the earth and Noah removed the covering of
the ark and looked and behold the face of the ground was
dry.
and in the second month on the seven and twentieth day of the
month was the earth dried.
and God spake unto Noah saying
go forth of the ark thou and thy wife and thy sons and thy
sons wives with thee.
bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee of
all flesh both of fowl and of cattle and of every creeping
thing that creepeth upon the earth that they may breed
abundantly in the earth and be fruitful and multiply upon
the earth.
and Noah went forth and his sons and his wife and his sons
wives with him
every beast every creeping thing and every fowl and
whatsoever creepeth upon the earth after their kinds went
forth out of the ark.
and Noah builded an altar unto the lord and took of every
clean beast and of every clean fowl and offered burnt
offerings on the altar.
and the lord smelled a sweet savour and the lord said in his
heart I will not again curse the ground any more for man s
sake for the imagination of man s heart is evil from his
youth Neither will I again smite any more every thing living
as I have done.
while the earth remaineth seedtime and harvest and cold and
heat and summer and winter and day and night shall not
cease.
and God blessed Noah and his sons and said unto them be
fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth.
and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every
beast of the earth and upon every fowl of the air upon all
that moveth upon the earth and upon all the fishes of the
sea into your hand are they delivered.
every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you even as
the green herb have I given you all things.
but flesh with the life thereof which is the blood thereof
shall ye not eat.
and surely your blood of your lives will I require at the
hand of every beast will I require it and at the hand of man
at the hand of every man s brother will I require the life of
man.
whoso sheddeth man s blood by man shall his blood be shed
for in the image of God made he man.
and you be ye fruitful and multiply bring forth abundantly
in the earth and multiply therein.
and God spake unto Noah and to his sons with him saying
and I behold I establish my covenant with you and with your
seed after you
and with every living creature that is with you of the fowl
of the cattle and of every beast of the earth with you from
all that go out of the ark to every beast of the earth.
and I will establish my covenant with you Neither shall all
flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood Neither
shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.
and God said this is the token of the covenant which I make
between me and you and every living creature that is with you
for perpetual generations
I do set my bow in the cloud and it shall be for a token of a
covenant between me and the earth.
and it shall come to pass when I bring a cloud over the
earth that the bow shall be seen in the cloud
and I will remember my covenant which is between me and you
and every living creature of all flesh and the waters shall
no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
and the bow shall be in the cloud and I will look upon it
that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and
every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.
and God said unto Noah this is the token of the covenant
which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon
the earth.
and the sons of Noah that went forth of the ark were Shem
and Ham and Japheth and Ham is the father of Canaan.
these are the three sons of Noah and of them was the whole
earth overspread.
and Noah began to be an husbandman and he planted a vineyard
and he drank of the wine and was drunken and he was
uncovered within his tent.
and Ham the father of Canaan saw the nakedness of his
father and told his two brethren without.
and Shem and Japheth took a garment and laid it upon both
their shoulders and went backward and covered the nakedness
of their father and their faces were backward and they saw
not their father s nakedness.
and Noah awoke from his wine and knew what his younger son
had done unto him.
and he said cursed be Canaan a servant of servants shall he
be unto his brethren.
and he said blessed be the lord God of Shem and Canaan shall
be his servant.
God shall enlarge Japheth and he shall dwell in the tents of
Shem and Canaan shall be his servant.
and Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.
and all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years
and he died.
now these are the generations of the sons of Noah Shem Ham
and Japheth and unto them were sons born after the flood.
the sons of Japheth Gomer and Magog and Madai and Javan
and Tubal and Meshech and Tiras.
and the sons of Gomer Ashkenaz and Riphath and Togarmah.
and the sons of Javan Elishah and Tarshish Kittim and
Dodanim.
by these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their
lands every one after his tongue after their families in
their nations.
and the sons of Ham Cush and Mizraim and Phut and Canaan.
and the sons of Cush Seba and Havilah and Sabtah and
Raamah and Sabtechah and the sons of Raamah Sheba and
Dedan.
and Cush begat Nimrod he began to be a Mighty one in the
earth.
he was a Mighty hunter before the lord wherefore it is said
even as Nimrod the Mighty hunter before the lord.
and the beginning of his kingdom was Babel and Erech and
Accad and Calneh in the land of Shinar.
out of that land went forth Asshur and builded Nineveh and
the city Rehoboth and Calah
and Resen between Nineveh and Calah the same is a great city.
and Mizraim begat Ludim and Anamim and Lehabim and
Naphtuhim
and Pathrusim and Casluhim out of whom came Philistim and
Caphtorim.
and Canaan begat Sidon his first born and Heth
and the Jebusite and the Amorite and the Girgasite
and the Hivite and the Arkite and the Sinite
and the Arvadite and the Zemarite and the Hamathite and
afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.
and the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon as thou
comest to Gerar unto Gaza as thou goest unto Sodom and
Gomorrah and Admah and Zeboim even unto Lasha.
these are the sons of Ham after their families after their
tongues in their countries and in their nations.
unto Shem also the father of all the children of Eber the
brother of Japheth the elder even to him were children born.
the children of Shem Elam and Asshur and Arphaxad and Lud
and Aram.
and the children of Aram Uz and Hul and Gether and Mash.
and Arphaxad begat Salah and Salah begat Eber.
and unto Eber were born two sons the name of one was Peleg
for in his days was the earth divided and his brother s name
was Joktan.
and Joktan begat Almodad and Sheleph and Hazarmaveth and
Jerah
and Hadoram and Uzal and Diklah
and Obal and Abimael and Sheba
and Ophir and Havilah and Jobab all these were the sons of
Joktan.
and their dwelling was from Mesha as thou goest unto Sephar a
mount of the east.
these are the sons of Shem after their families after their
tongues in their lands after their nations.
these are the families of the sons of Noah after their
generations in their nations and by these were the nations
divided in the earth after the flood.
and the whole earth was of one language and of one speech.
and it came to pass as they journeyed from the east that
they found a plain in the land of Shinar and they dwelt
there.
and they said one to another go to let us make brick and
burn them thoroughly. and they had brick for stone and slime
had they for morter.
and they said go to let us build us a city and a tower
whose top may reach unto heaven and let us make us a name
lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
and the lord came down to see the city and the tower which
the children of men builded.
and the lord said behold the people is one and they have
all one language and this they begin to do and now nothing
will be restrained from them which they have imagined to do.
go to let us go down and there confound their language that
they may not understand one another s speech.
so the lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of
all the earth and they left off to build the city.
therefore is the name of it called Babel because the lord did
there confound the language of all the earth and from thence
did the lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the
earth.
these are the generations of Shem Shem was an hundred years
old and begat Arphaxad two years after the flood
and Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years and
begat sons and daughters.
and Arphaxad lived five and thirty years and begat Salah
and Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and three
years and begat sons and daughters.
and Salah lived thirty years and begat Eber
and Salah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three
years and begat sons and daughters.
and Eber lived four and thirty years and begat Peleg
and Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty
years and begat sons and daughters.
and Peleg lived thirty years and begat Reu
and Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years
and begat sons and daughters.
and Reu lived two and thirty years and begat Serug
and Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven
years and begat sons and daughters.
and Serug lived thirty years and begat Nahor
and Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years and
begat sons and daughters.
and Nahor lived nine and twenty years and begat Terah
and Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and nineteen
years and begat sons and daughters.
and Terah lived seventy years and begat Abram Nahor and
Haran.
now these are the generations of Terah Terah begat Abram
Nahor and Haran and Haran begat Lot.
and Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his
nativity in Ur of the Chaldees.
and Abram and Nahor took them wives the name of Abram s wife
was Sarai and the name of Nahor s wife Milcah the daughter
of Haran the father of Milcah and the father of Iscah.
but Sarai was barren she had no child.
and Terah took Abram his son and Lot the son of Haran his
son s son and Sarai his daughter in law his son Abram s
wife and they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees
to go into the land of Canaan and they came unto Haran and
dwelt there.
and the days of Terah were two hundred and five years and
Terah died in Haran.
now the lord had said unto Abram get thee out of thy country
and from thy kindred and from thy father s house unto a land
that I will shew thee
and I will make of thee a great nation and I will bless thee
and make thy name great and thou shalt be a blessing
and I will bless them that bless thee and curse him that
curseth thee and in thee shall all families of the earth be
blessed.
so Abram departed as the lord had spoken unto him and Lot
went with him and Abram was seventy and five years old when
he departed out of Haran.
and Abram took Sarai his wife and Lot his brother s son and
all their substance that they had gathered and the souls that
they had gotten in Haran and they went forth to go into the
land of Canaan and into the land of Canaan they came.
and Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem
unto the plain of Moreh. and the Canaanite was then in the
land.
and the lord appeared unto Abram and said unto thy seed will
I give this land and there builded he an altar unto the lord
who appeared unto him.
and he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of
Bethel and pitched his tent having Bethel on the west and
Hai on the east and there he builded an altar unto the lord
and called upon the name of the lord.
and Abram journeyed going on still toward the south.
and there was a famine in the land and Abram went down into
Egypt to Sojourn there for the famine was grievous in the
land.
and it came to pass when he was come near to enter into
Egypt that he said unto Sarai his wife behold now I know
that thou art a fair woman to look upon
therefore it shall come to pass when the Egyptians shall see
thee that they shall say this is his wife and they will
kill me but they will save thee alive.
say I pray thee thou art my sister that it may be well with
me for thy sake and my soul shall live because of thee.
and it came to pass that when Abram was come into Egypt the
Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.
the princes also of Pharaoh saw her and commended her before
Pharaoh and the woman was taken into Pharaoh s house.
and he entreated Abram well for her sake and he had sheep
and oxen and he asses and menservants and maidservants and
she asses and camels.
and the lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues
because of Sarai Abram s wife.
and Pharaoh called Abram and said what is this that thou hast
done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy
wife?
why saidst thou she is my sister? so I might have taken her
to me to wife now therefore behold thy wife take her and go
thy way.
and Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him and they sent
him away and his wife and all that he had.
and Abram went up out of Egypt he and his wife and all that
he had and Lot with him into the south.
and Abram was very rich in cattle in Silver and in gold.
and he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel
unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning
between Bethel and Hai
unto the place of the altar which he had make there at the
first and there Abram called on the name of the lord.
and Lot also which went with Abram had flocks and herds
and tents.
and the land was not able to bear them that they might dwell
together for their substance was great so that they could
not dwell together.
and there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram s cattle
and the herdmen of Lot s cattle and the Canaanite and the
Perizzite dwelled then in the land.
and Abram said unto Lot let there be no strife I pray thee
between me and thee and between my herdmen and thy herdmen
for we be brethren.
is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself I pray
thee from me if thou wilt take the left hand then I will go
to the right or if thou depart to the right hand then I will
go to the left.
and Lot lifted up his eyes and beheld all the plain of
Jordan that it was well watered every where before the lord
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah even as the garden of the lord
like the land of Egypt as thou comest unto Zoar.
then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan and Lot journeyed
east and they separated themselves the one from the other.
Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan and Lot dwelled in the
cities of the plain and pitched his tent toward Sodom.
but the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the lord
exceedingly.
and the lord said unto Abram after that Lot was separated
from him lift up now thine eyes and look from the place
where thou art northward and southward and eastward and
westward
for all the land which thou seest to thee will I give it and
to thy seed for ever.
and I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth so that if
a man can number the dust of the earth then shall thy seed
also be numbered.
Arise walk through the land in the length of it and in the
breadth of it for I will give it unto thee.
then Abram removed his tent and came and dwelt in the plain
of Mamre which is in Hebron and built there an altar unto
the lord.
and it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar
Arioch king of Ellasar Chedorlaomer king of Elam and Tidal
king of nations
that these made war with Bera king of Sodom and with Birsha
king of Gomorrah Shinab king of Admah and Shemeber king of
Zeboiim and the king of Bela which is Zoar.
all these were joined together in the vale of Siddim which is
the salt sea.
twelve years they served Chedorlaomer and in the thirteenth
year they rebelled.
and in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer and the kings
that were with him and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth
Karnaim and the Zuzims in Ham and the Emins in Shaveh
Kiriathaim
and the Horites in their mount Seir unto Elparan which is by
the wilderness.
and they returned and came to Enmishpat which is Kadesh and
smote all the country of the Amalekites and also the
Amorites that dwelt in Hazezontamar.
and there went out the king of Sodom and the king of
Gomorrah and the king of Admah and the king of Zeboiim and
the king of Bela the same is Zoar and they joined battle
with them in the vale of Siddim
with Chedorlaomer the king of Elam and with Tidal king of
nations and Amraphel king of Shinar and Arioch king of
Ellasar four kings with five.
and the vale of Siddim was full of slimepits and the kings of
Sodom and Gomorrah fled and fell there and they that
remained fled to the mountain.
and they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all
their victuals and went their way.
and they took Lot Abram s brother s son who dwelt in Sodom
and his goods and departed.
and there came one that had escaped and told Abram the
Hebrew for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite
brother of Eshcol and brother of Aner and these were
confederate with Abram.
and when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive he
armed his trained servants born in his own house three
hundred and eighteen and pursued them unto Dan.
and he divided himself against them he and his servants by
night and smote them and pursued them unto Hobah which is
on the left hand of Damascus.
and he brought back all the goods and also brought again his
brother Lot and his goods and the women also and the
people.
and the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return
from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer and of the kings that were
with him at the valley of Shaveh which is the king s dale.
and Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine
and he was the priest of the most high God.
and he blessed him and said blessed be Abram of the most
high God possessor of heaven and earth
and blessed be the most high God which hath delivered thine
enemies into thy hand. and he gave him tithes of all.
and the king of Sodom said unto Abram give me the persons
and take the goods to thyself.
and Abram said to the king of Sodom I have lift up mine hand
unto the lord the most high God the possessor of heaven and
earth
that I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet and
that I will not take any thing that is thine lest thou
shouldest say I have made Abram rich
save only that which the young men have eaten and the portion
of the men which went with me Aner Eshcol and Mamre let
them take their portion.
after these things the word of the lord came unto Abram in a
vision saying fear not Abram I Am thy shield and thy
exceeding great reward.
and Abram said lord God what wilt thou give me seeing I go
childless and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of
Damascus?
and Abram said behold to me thou hast given no seed and
lo one born in my house is mine heir.
and behold the word of the lord came unto him saying this
shall not be thine heir but he that shall come forth out of
thine own bowels shall be thine heir.
and he brought him forth abroad and said look now toward
heaven and tell the stars if thou be able to number them
and he said unto him so shall thy seed be.
and he believed in the lord and he counted it to him for
righteousness.
and he said unto him I Am the lord that brought thee out of
Ur of the Chaldees to give thee this land to inherit it.
and he said lord God whereby shall I know that I shall
inherit it?
and he said unto him take me an heifer of three years old
and a she goat of three years old and a Ram of three years
old and a turtledove and a young pigeon.
and he took unto him all these and divided them in the midst
and laid each piece one against another but the birds divided
he not.
and when the fowls came down upon the carcases Abram drove
them away.
and when the sun was going down a deep sleep fell upon Abram
and lo an horror of great darkness fell upon him.
and he said unto Abram know of a surety that thy seed shall
be a stranger in a land that is not their s and shall serve
them and they shall afflict them four hundred years
and also that nation whom they shall serve will I judge and
afterward shall they come out with great substance.
and thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace thou shalt be
buried in a good old age.
but in the fourth generation they shall come hither again for
the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.
and it came to pass that when the sun went down and it was
dark behold a smoking furnace and a burning lamp that passed
between those pieces.
in the same day the lord made a covenant with Abram saying
unto thy seed have I given this land from the river of Egypt
unto the great river the river Euphrates
the Kenites and the Kenizzites and the Kadmonites
and the Hittites and the Perizzites and the Rephaims
and the Amorites and the Canaanites and the Girgashites and
the Jebusites.
now Sarai Abram s wife bare him no children and she had an
handmaid an Egyptian whose name was Hagar.
and Sarai said unto Abram behold now the lord hath
restrained me from bearing I pray thee go in unto my maid
it may be that I may obtain children by her. and Abram
hearkened to the voice of Sarai.
and Sarai Abram s wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian after
Abram had dwelt Ten years in the land of Canaan and gave her
to her husband Abram to be his wife.
and he went in unto Hagar and she conceived and when she saw
that she had conceived her mistress was despised in her eyes.
and Sarai said unto Abram my wrong be upon thee I have given
my maid into thy bosom and when she saw that she had
conceived I was despised in her eyes the lord judge between
me and thee.
but Abram said unto Sarai behold thy maid is in thine hand
do to her as it pleaseth thee. and when Sarai dealt hardly
with her she fled from her face.
and the angel of the lord found her by a fountain of water in
the wilderness by the fountain in the way to Shur.
and he said Hagar Sarai s maid whence camest thou? and
whither wilt thou go? and she said I flee from the face of my
mistress Sarai.
and the angel of the lord said unto her return to thy
mistress and submit thyself under her hands.
and the angel of the lord said unto her I will multiply thy
seed exceedingly that it shall not be numbered for multitude.
and the angel of the lord said unto her behold thou art with
child and shalt bear a son and shalt call his name Ishmael
because the lord hath heard thy affliction.
and he will be a wild man his hand will be against every man
and every man s hand against him and he shall dwell in the
presence of all his brethren.
and she called the name of the lord that spake unto her thou
God seest me for she said have I also here looked after him
that seeth me?
wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi behold it is
between Kadesh and Bered.
and Hagar bare Abram a son and Abram called his son s name
which Hagar bare Ishmael.
and Abram was fourscore and six years old when Hagar bare
Ishmael to Abram.
and when Abram was ninety years old and nine the lord
appeared to Abram and said unto him I Am the almighty God
walk before me and be thou perfect.
and I will make my covenant between me and thee and will
multiply thee exceedingly.
and Abram fell on his face and God talked with him saying
as for me behold my covenant is with thee and thou shalt be
a father of many nations.
Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram but thy name
shall be Abraham for a father of many nations have I made
thee.
and I will make thee exceeding fruitful and I will make
nations of thee and kings shall come out of thee.
and I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy
seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting
covenant to be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee.
and I will give unto thee and to thy seed after thee the
land wherein thou art a stranger all the land of Canaan for
an everlasting possession and I will be their God.
and God said unto Abraham thou shalt keep my covenant
therefore thou and thy seed after thee in their generations.
this is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you
and thy seed after thee every man child among you shall be
circumcised.
and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin and it
shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.
and he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you
every man child in your generations he that is born in the
house or bought with money of any stranger which is not of
thy seed.
he that is born in thy house and he that is bought with thy
money must needs be circumcised and my covenant shall be in
your flesh for an everlasting covenant.
and the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is
not circumcised that soul shall be cut off from his people
he hath broken my covenant.
and God said unto Abraham as for Sarai thy wife thou shalt
not call her name Sarai but Sarah shall her name be.
and I will bless her and give thee a son also of her yea I
will bless her and she shall be a mother of nations kings of
people shall be of her.
then Abraham fell upon his face and laughed and said in his
heart shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years
old? and shall Sarah that is ninety years old bear?
and Abraham said unto God O that Ishmael might live before
thee
and God said Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed and
thou shalt call his name Isaac and I will establish my
covenant with him for an everlasting covenant and with his
seed after him.
and as for Ishmael I have heard thee behold I have blessed
him and will make him fruitful and will multiply him
exceedingly twelve princes shall he beget and I will make
him a great nation.
but my covenant will I establish with Isaac which Sarah shall
bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.
and he left off talking with him and God went up from
Abraham.
and Abraham took Ishmael his son and all that were born in
his house and all that were bought with his money every Male
among the men of Abraham s house and circumcised the flesh of
their foreskin in the selfsame day as God had said unto him.
and Abraham was ninety years old and nine when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
and Ishmael his son was thirteen years old when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
in the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised and Ishmael his
son.
and all the men of his house born in the house and bought
with money of the stranger were circumcised with him.
and the lord appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre and he
sat in the tent door in the heat of the day
and he lift up his eyes and looked and lo three men stood
by him and when he saw them he ran to meet them from the
tent door and bowed himself toward the ground
and said my lord if now I have found favour in thy sight
pass not away I pray thee from thy servant
let a little water I pray you be fetched and wash your
feet and rest yourselves under the tree
and I will fetch a morsel of bread and comfort ye your
hearts after that ye shall pass on for therefore are ye come
to your servant. and they said so do as thou hast said.
and Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah and said make
ready quickly three measures of fine meal knead it and make
cakes upon the hearth.
and Abraham ran unto the herd and fetcht a calf tender and
good and gave it unto a young man and he hasted to dress it.
and he took butter and milk and the calf which he had
dressed and set it before them and he stood by them under
the tree and they did eat.
and they said unto him where is Sarah thy wife? and he said
behold in the tent.
and he said I will certainly return unto thee according to
the time of life and lo Sarah thy wife shall have a son.
and Sarah heard it in the tent door which was behind him.
now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age and
it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
therefore Sarah laughed within herself saying after I Am
waxed old shall I have pleasure my lord being old also?
and the lord said unto Abraham wherefore did Sarah laugh
saying shall I of a surety bear a child which Am old?
is any thing too hard for the lord? at the time appointed I
will return unto thee according to the time of life and
Sarah shall have a son.
then Sarah denied saying I laughed not for she was afraid.
and he said nay but thou didst laugh.
and the men rose up from thence and looked toward Sodom and
Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.
and the lord said shall I hide from Abraham that thing which
I do
seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and Mighty
nation and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in
him?
for I know him that he will command his children and his
household after him and they shall keep the way of the lord
to do justice and judgment that the lord may bring upon
Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.
and the lord said because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is
great and because their Sin is very grievous
I will go down now and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it which is come unto me and if not
I will know.
and the men turned their faces from thence and went toward
Sodom but Abraham stood yet before the lord.
and Abraham drew near and said wilt thou also destroy the
righteous with the wicked?
peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city wilt
thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty
righteous that are therein?
that be far from thee to do after this manner to slay the
righteous with the wicked and that the righteous should be as
the wicked that be far from thee shall not the judge of all
the earth do right?
and the lord said if I find in Sodom fifty righteous within
the city then I will spare all the place for their sakes.
and Abraham answered and said behold now I have taken upon
me to speak unto the lord which Am but dust and ashes
peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous
wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five? and he said
if I find there forty and five I will not destroy it.
and he spake unto him yet again and said peradventure there
shall be forty found there. and he said I will not do it for
forty s sake.
and he said unto him oh let not the lord be angry and I will
speak peradventure there shall thirty be found there. and he
said I will not do it if I find thirty there.
and he said behold now I have taken upon me to speak unto
the lord peradventure there shall be twenty found there. and
he said I will not destroy it for twenty s sake.
and he said oh let not the lord be angry and I will speak
yet but this once peradventure Ten shall be found there. and
he said I will not destroy it for Ten s sake.
and the lord went his way as soon as he had left communing
with Abraham and Abraham returned unto his place.
and there came two angels to Sodom at even and Lot sat in the
gate of Sodom and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them and
he bowed himself with his face toward the ground
and he said behold now my lords turn in I pray you into
your servant s house and tarry all night and wash your feet
and ye shall rise up early and go on your ways. and they
said nay but we will abide in the street all night.
and he pressed upon them greatly and they turned in unto him
and entered into his house and he made them a feast and did
bake unleavened bread and they did eat.
but before they lay down the men of the city even the men of
Sodom compassed the house round both old and young all the
people from every quarter
and they called unto Lot and said unto him where are the men
which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us that
we may know them.
and Lot went out at the door unto them and shut the door
after him
and said I pray you brethren do not so wickedly.
behold now I have two daughters which have not known man let
me I pray you bring them out unto you and do ye to them as
is good in your eyes only unto these men do nothing for
therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.
and they said stand back. and they said again this one
fellow came in to Sojourn and he will needs be a judge now
will we deal worse with thee than with them. and they pressed
sore upon the man even Lot and came near to break the door.
but the men put forth their hand and pulled Lot into the
house to them and shut to the door.
and they smote the men that were at the door of the house with
blindness both small and great so that they wearied
themselves to find the door.
and the men said unto Lot hast thou here any besides? son in
law and thy sons and thy daughters and whatsoever thou hast
in the city bring them out of this place
for we will destroy this place because the cry of them is
waxen great before the face of the lord and the lord hath
sent us to destroy it.
and Lot went out and spake unto his sons in law which
married his daughters and said up get you out of this
place for the lord will destroy this city. but he seemed as
one that mocked unto his sons in law.
and when the morning arose then the angels hastened Lot
saying Arise take thy wife and thy two daughters which are
here lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.
and while he lingered the men laid hold upon his hand and
upon the hand of his wife and upon the hand of his two
daughters the lord being merciful unto him and they brought
him forth and set him without the city.
and it came to pass when they had brought them forth abroad
that he said escape for thy life look not behind thee
Neither stay thou in all the plain escape to the mountain
lest thou be consumed.
and Lot said unto them oh not so my lord
behold now thy servant hath found grace in thy sight and
thou hast magnified thy mercy which thou hast shewed unto me
in saving my life and I cannot escape to the mountain lest
some evil take me and I die
behold now this city is near to flee unto and it is a little
one oh let me escape thither is it not a little one? and
my soul shall live.
and he said unto him see I have accepted thee concerning
this thing also that I will not overthrow this city for the
which thou hast spoken.
haste thee escape thither for I cannot do anything till thou
be come thither. therefore the name of the city was called
Zoar.
the sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.
then the lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone
and fire from the lord out of heaven
and he overthrew those cities and all the plain and all the
inhabitants of the cities and that which grew upon the
ground.
but his wife looked back from behind him and she became a
pillar of salt.
and Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he
stood before the lord
and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah and toward all the
land of the plain and beheld and lo the smoke of the
country went up as the smoke of a furnace.
and it came to pass when God destroyed the cities of the
plain that God remembered Abraham and sent Lot out of the
midst of the overthrow when he overthrew the cities in the
which Lot dwelt.
and Lot went up out of Zoar and dwelt in the mountain and
his two daughters with him for he feared to dwell in Zoar
and he dwelt in a cave he and his two daughters.
and the firstborn said unto the younger our father is old
and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after
the manner of all the earth
come let us make our father drink wine and we will lie with
him that we may preserve seed of our father.
and they made their father drink wine that night and the
firstborn went in and lay with her father and he perceived
not when she lay down nor when she arose.
and it came to pass on the morrow that the firstborn said
unto the younger behold I lay yesternight with my father
let us make him drink wine this night also and go thou in
and lie with him that we may preserve seed of our father.
and they made their father drink wine that night also and the
younger arose and lay with him and he perceived not when she
lay down nor when she arose.
thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their
father.
and the first born bare a son and called his name Moab the
same is the father of the Moabites unto this day.
and the younger she also bare a son and called his name
Benammi the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto
this day.
and Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country
and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur and sojourned in Gerar.
and Abraham said of Sarah his wife she is my sister and
Abimelech king of Gerar sent and took Sarah.
but God came to Abimelech in a dream by night and said to
him behold thou art but a dead man for the woman which thou
hast taken for she is a man s wife.
but Abimelech had not come near her and he said lord wilt
thou slay also a righteous nation?
said he not unto me she is my sister? and she even she
herself said he is my brother in the integrity of my heart
and innocency of my hands have I done this.
and God said unto him in a dream yea I know that thou didst
this in the integrity of thy heart for I also withheld thee
from sinning against me therefore suffered I thee not to
touch her.
now therefore restore the man his wife for he is a prophet
and he shall pray for thee and thou shalt live and if thou
restore her not know thou that thou shalt surely die thou
and all that are thine.
therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning and called all
his servants and told all these things in their ears and the
men were sore afraid.
then Abimelech called Abraham and said unto him what hast
thou done unto us? and what have I offended thee that thou
hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great Sin? thou hast
done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.
and Abimelech said unto Abraham what sawest thou that thou
hast done this thing?
and Abraham said because I thought surely the fear of God is
not in this place and they will slay me for my wife s sake.
and yet indeed she is my sister she is the daughter of my
father but not the daughter of my mother and she became my
wife.
and it came to pass when God caused me to wander from my
father s house that I said unto her this is thy kindness
which thou shalt shew unto me at every place whither we shall
come say of me he is my brother.
and Abimelech took sheep and oxen and menservants and
womenservants and gave them unto Abraham and restored him
Sarah his wife.
and Abimelech said behold my land is before thee dwell
where it pleaseth thee.
and unto Sarah he said behold I have given thy brother a
thousand pieces of Silver behold he is to thee a covering of
the eyes unto all that are with thee and with all other
thus she was reproved.
so Abraham prayed unto God and God healed Abimelech and his
wife and his maidservants and they bare children.
for the lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of
Abimelech because of Sarah Abraham s wife.
and the lord visited Sarah as he had said and the lord did
unto Sarah as he had spoken.
for Sarah conceived and bare Abraham a son in his old age at
the set time of which God had spoken to him.
and Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him
whom Sarah bare to him Isaac.
and Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old as
God had commanded him.
and Abraham was an hundred years old when his son Isaac was
born unto him.
and Sarah said God hath made me to laugh so that all that
hear will laugh with me.
and she said who would have said unto Abraham that Sarah
should have given children suck? for I have born him a son in
his old age.
and the child grew and was weaned and Abraham made a great
feast the same day that Isaac was weaned.
and Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian which she had
born unto Abraham mocking.
wherefore she said unto Abraham cast out this bondwoman and
her son for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with
my son even with Isaac.
and the thing was very grievous in Abraham s sight because of
his son.
and God said unto Abraham let it not be grievous in thy sight
because of the lad and because of thy bondwoman in all that
Sarah hath said unto thee hearken unto her voice for in
Isaac shall thy seed be called.
and also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation
because he is thy seed.
and Abraham rose up early in the morning and took bread and
a bottle of water and gave it unto Hagar putting it on her
shoulder and the child and sent her away and she departed
and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
and the water was spent in the bottle and she cast the child
under one of the shrubs.
and she went and sat her down over against him a good way
off as it were a bow shot for she said let me not see the
death of the child. and she sat over against him and lift up
her voice and wept.
and God heard the voice of the lad and the angel of God
called to Hagar out of heaven and said unto her what aileth
thee Hagar? fear not for God hath heard the voice of the lad
where he is.
Arise lift up the lad and hold him in thine hand for I will
make him a great nation.
and God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water and she
went and filled the bottle with water and gave the lad
drink.
and God was with the lad and he grew and dwelt in the
wilderness and became an archer.
and he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran and his mother took
him a wife out of the land of Egypt.
and it came to pass at that time that Abimelech and Phichol
the chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham saying God
is with thee in all that thou doest
now therefore swear unto me here by God that thou wilt not
deal falsely with me nor with my son nor with my son s son
but according to the kindness that I have done unto thee thou
shalt do unto me and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.
and Abraham said I will swear.
and Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water
which Abimelech s servants had violently taken away.
and Abimelech said I wot not who hath done this thing
Neither didst thou tell me Neither yet heard I of it but to
day.
and Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave them unto Abimelech
and both of them made a covenant.
and Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
and Abimelech said unto Abraham what mean these seven ewe
lambs which thou hast set by themselves?
and he said for these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my
hand that they may be a witness unto me that I have digged
this well.
wherefore he called that place Beersheba because there they
sware both of them.
thus they made a covenant at Beersheba then Abimelech rose
up and Phichol the chief captain of his host and they
returned into the land of the Philistines.
and Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba and called there on
the name of the lord the everlasting God.
and Abraham sojourned in the Philistines land many days.
and it came to pass after these things that God did tempt
Abraham and said unto him Abraham and he said behold here
I Am.
and he said take now thy son thine only son Isaac whom thou
lovest and get thee into the land of Moriah and offer him
there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I
will tell thee of.
and Abraham rose up early in the morning and saddled his ass
and took two of his young men with him and Isaac his son and
clave the wood for the burnt offering and rose up and went
unto the place of which God had told him.
then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the
place afar off.
and Abraham said unto his young men abide ye here with the
ass and I and the lad will go yonder and worship and come
again to you.
and Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering and laid it
upon Isaac his son and he took the fire in his hand and a
knife and they went both of them together.
and Isaac spake unto Abraham his father and said my father
and he said here Am I my son. and he said behold the fire
and the wood but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?
and Abraham said my son God will provide himself a lamb for
a burnt offering so they went both of them together.
and they came to the place which God had told him of and
Abraham built an altar there and laid the wood in order and
bound Isaac his son and laid him on the altar upon the wood.
and Abraham stretched forth his hand and took the knife to
slay his son.
and the angel of the lord called unto him out of heaven and
said Abraham Abraham and he said here Am I.
and he said lay not thine hand upon the lad Neither do thou
any thing unto him for now I know that thou fearest God
seeing thou hast not withheld thy son thine only son from me.
and Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked and behold behind
him a Ram caught in a thicket by his horns and Abraham went
and took the Ram and offered him up for a burnt offering in
the stead of his son.
and Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh as it
is said to this day in the mount of the lord it shall be
seen.
and the angel of the lord called unto Abraham out of heaven
the second time
and said by myself have I sworn saith the lord for because
thou hast done this thing and hast not withheld thy son
thine only son
that in blessing I will bless thee and in multiplying I will
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven and as the sand
which is upon the sea shore and thy seed shall possess the
gate of his enemies
and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed
because thou hast obeyed my voice.
so Abraham returned unto his young men and they rose up and
went together to Beersheba and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.
and it came to pass after these things that it was told
Abraham saying behold Milcah she hath also born children
unto thy brother Nahor
Huz his firstborn and Buz his brother and Kemuel the father
of Aram
and Chesed and Hazo and Pildash and Jidlaph and Bethuel.
and Bethuel begat Rebekah these eight Milcah did bear to
Nahor Abraham s brother.
and his concubine whose name was Reumah she bare also Tebah
and Gaham and Thahash and Maachah.
and Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old these
were the years of the life of Sarah.
and Sarah died in Kirjatharba the same is Hebron in the land
of Canaan and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah and to weep
for her.
and Abraham stood up from before his dead and spake unto the
sons of Heth saying
I Am a stranger and a sojourner with you give me a possession
of a buryingplace with you that I may bury my dead out of my
sight.
and the children of Heth answered Abraham saying unto him
hear us my lord thou art a Mighty prince among us in the
choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead none of us shall
withhold from thee his sepulchre but that thou mayest bury
thy dead.
and Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the people of the
land even to the children of Heth.
and he communed with them saying if it be your mind that I
should bury my dead out of my sight hear me and intreat for
me to Ephron the son of Zohar
that he may give me the cave of Machpelah which he hath
which is in the end of his field for as Much money as it is
worth he shall give it me for a possession of a buryingplace
amongst you.
and Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth and Ephron the
Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of
Heth even of all that went in at the gate of his city
saying
nay my lord hear me the field give I thee and the cave
that is therein I give it thee in the presence of the sons
of my people give I it thee bury thy dead.
and Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.
and he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the
land saying but if thou wilt give it I pray thee hear me
I will give thee money for the field take it of me and I
will bury my dead there.
and Ephron answered Abraham saying unto him
my lord hearken unto me the land is worth four hundred
shekels of Silver what is that betwixt me and thee? bury
therefore thy dead.
and Abraham hearkened unto Ephron and Abraham weighed to
Ephron the Silver which he had named in the audience of the
sons of Heth four hundred shekels of Silver current money
with the merchant.
and the field of Ephron which was in Machpelah which was
before Mamre the field and the cave which was therein and
all the trees that were in the field that were in all the
borders round about were made sure
unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children
of Heth before all that went in at the gate of his city.
and after this Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of
the field of Machpelah before Mamre the same is Hebron in the
land of Canaan.
and the field and the cave that is therein were made sure
unto Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of
Heth.
and Abraham was old and well stricken in age and the lord
had blessed Abraham in all things.
and Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house that
ruled over all that he had put I pray thee thy hand under
my thigh
and I will make thee swear by the lord the God of heaven and
the God of the earth that thou shalt not take a wife unto my
son of the daughters of the Canaanites among whom I dwell
but thou shalt go unto my country and to my kindred and take
a wife unto my son Isaac.
and the servant said unto him peradventure the woman will not
be willing to follow me unto this land must I needs bring thy
son again unto the land from whence thou camest?
and Abraham said unto him beware thou that thou bring not my
son thither again.
the lord God of heaven which took me from my father s house
and from the land of my kindred and which spake unto me and
that sware unto me saying unto thy seed will I give this
land he shall send his angel before thee and thou shalt take
a wife unto my son from thence.
and if the woman will not be willing to follow thee then thou
shalt be clear from this my oath only bring not my son
thither again.
and the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his
Master and sware to him concerning that matter.
and the servant took Ten camels of the camels of his Master
and departed for all the goods of his Master were in his
hand and he arose and went to Mesopotamia unto the city of
Nahor.
and he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a
well of water at the time of the evening even the time that
women go out to draw water.
and he said O lord God of my Master Abraham I pray thee send
me good speed this day and shew kindness unto my Master
Abraham.
behold I stand here by the well of water and the daughters
of the men of the city come out to draw water
and let it come to pass that the damsel to whom I shall say
let down thy pitcher I pray thee that I may drink and she
shall say drink and I will give thy camels drink also let
the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant
Isaac and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness
unto my Master.
and it came to pass before he had done speaking that
behold Rebekah came out who was born to Bethuel son of
Milcah the wife of Nahor Abraham s brother with her pitcher
upon her shoulder.
and the damsel was very fair to look upon a virgin Neither
had any man known her and she went down to the well and
filled her pitcher and came up.
and the servant ran to meet her and said let me I pray
thee drink a little water of thy pitcher.
and she said drink my lord and she hasted and let down her
pitcher upon her hand and gave him drink.
and when she had done giving him drink she said I will draw
water for thy camels also until they have done drinking.
and she hasted and emptied her pitcher into the trough and
ran again unto the well to draw water and drew for all his
camels.
and the man wondering at her held his peace to wit whether
the lord had made his journey prosperous or not.
and it came to pass as the camels had done drinking that the
man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight and two
bracelets for her hands of Ten shekels weight of gold
and said whose daughter art thou? tell me I pray thee is
there room in thy father s house for us to lodge in?
and she said unto him I Am the daughter of Bethuel the son of
Milcah which she bare unto Nahor.
she said moreover unto him we have both straw and provender
enough and room to lodge in.
and the man bowed down his head and worshipped the lord.
and he said blessed be the lord God of my Master Abraham who
hath not left destitute my Master of his mercy and his truth
I being in the way the lord led me to the house of my
Master s brethren.
and the damsel ran and told them of her mother s house these
things.
and Rebekah had a brother and his name was Laban and Laban
ran out unto the man unto the well.
and it came to pass when he saw the earring and bracelets
upon his sister s hands and when he heard the words of
Rebekah his sister saying thus spake the man unto me that
he came unto the man and behold he stood by the camels at
the well.
and he said come in thou blessed of the lord wherefore
standest thou without? for I have prepared the house and room
for the camels.
and the man came into the house and he ungirded his camels
and gave straw and provender for the camels and water to wash
his feet and the men s feet that were with him.
and there was set meat before him to eat but he said I will
not eat until I have told mine errand. and he said speak on.
and he said I Am Abraham s servant.
and the lord hath blessed my Master greatly and he is become
great and he hath given him flocks and herds and Silver
and gold and menservants and maidservants and camels and
asses.
and Sarah my Master s wife bare a son to my Master when she
was old and unto him hath he given all that he hath.
and my Master made me swear saying thou shalt not take a
wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites in whose
land I dwell
but thou shalt go unto my father s house and to my kindred
and take a wife unto my son.
and I said unto my Master peradventure the woman will not
follow me.
and he said unto me the lord before whom I walk will send
his angel with thee and prosper thy way and thou shalt take
a wife for my son of my kindred and of my father s house
then shalt thou be clear from this my oath when thou comest
to my kindred and if they give not thee one thou shalt be
clear from my oath.
and I came this day unto the well and said O lord God of my
Master Abraham if now thou do prosper my way which I go
behold I stand by the well of water and it shall come to
pass that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water and I
say to her give me I pray thee a little water of thy
pitcher to drink
and she say to me both drink thou and I will also draw for
thy camels let the same be the woman whom the lord hath
appointed out for my Master s son.
and before I had done speaking in mine heart behold Rebekah
came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder and she went down
unto the well and drew water and I said unto her let me
drink I pray thee.
and she made haste and let down her pitcher from her
shoulder and said drink and I will give thy camels drink
also so I drank and she made the camels drink also.
and I asked her and said whose daughter art thou? and she
said the daughter of Bethuel Nahor s son whom Milcah bare
unto him and I put the earring upon her face and the
bracelets upon her hands.
and I bowed down my head and worshipped the lord and blessed
the lord God of my Master Abraham which had led me in the
right way to take my Master s brother s daughter unto his son.
and now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my Master tell
me and if not tell me that I may turn to the right hand or
to the left.
then Laban and Bethuel answered and said the thing proceedeth
from the lord we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.
behold Rebekah is before thee take her and go and let her
be thy Master s son s wife as the lord hath spoken.
and it came to pass that when Abraham s servant heard their
words he worshipped the lord bowing himself to the earth.
and the servant brought forth jewels of Silver and jewels of
gold and raiment and gave them to Rebekah he gave also to
her brother and to her mother precious things.
and they did eat and drink he and the men that were with him
and tarried all night and they rose up in the morning and he
said send me away unto my Master.
and her brother and her mother said let the damsel abide with
us a few days at the least Ten after that she shall go.
and he said unto them hinder me not seeing the lord hath
prospered my way send me away that I may go to my Master.
and they said we will call the damsel and enquire at her
mouth.
and they called Rebekah and said unto her wilt thou go with
this man? and she said I will go.
and they sent away Rebekah their sister and her nurse and
Abraham s servant and his men.
and they blessed Rebekah and said unto her thou art our
sister be thou the mother of thousands of millions and let
thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.
and Rebekah arose and her damsels and they rode upon the
camels and followed the man and the servant took Rebekah
and went his way.
and Isaac came from the way of the well Lahairoi for he dwelt
in the south country.
and Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide
and he lifted up his eyes and saw and behold the camels
were coming.
and Rebekah lifted up her eyes and when she saw Isaac she
lighted off the camel.
for she had said unto the servant what man is this that
walketh in the field to meet us? and the servant had said it
is my Master therefore she took a vail and covered herself.
and the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.
and Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah s tent and took
Rebekah and she became his wife and he loved her and Isaac
was comforted after his mother s death.
then again Abraham took a wife and her name was Keturah.
and she bare him Zimran and Jokshan and Medan and Midian
and Ishbak and Shuah.
and Jokshan begat Sheba and Dedan. and the sons of Dedan were
Asshurim and Letushim and Leummim.
and the sons of Midian Ephah and Epher and Hanoch and
Abidah and Eldaah. all these were the children of Keturah.
and Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.
but unto the sons of the concubines which Abraham had
Abraham gave gifts and sent them away from Isaac his son
while he yet lived eastward unto the east country.
and these are the days of the years of Abraham s life which he
lived an hundred threescore and fifteen years.
then Abraham gave up the ghost and died in a good old age an
old man and full of years and was gathered to his people.
and his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of
Machpelah in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the
Hittite which is before Mamre
the field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth there
was Abraham buried and Sarah his wife.
and it came to pass after the death of Abraham that God
blessed his son Isaac and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahairoi.
now these are the generations of Ishmael Abraham s son whom
Hagar the Egyptian Sarah s handmaid bare unto Abraham
and these are the names of the sons of Ishmael by their
names according to their generations the firstborn of
Ishmael Nebajoth and Kedar and Adbeel and Mibsam
and Mishma and Dumah and Massa
Hadar and Tema Jetur Naphish and Kedemah
these are the sons of Ishmael and these are their names by
their towns and by their castles twelve princes according to
their nations.
and these are the years of the life of Ishmael an hundred and
thirty and seven years and he gave up the ghost and died and
was gathered unto his people.
and they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur that is before Egypt
as thou goest toward Assyria and he died in the presence of
all his brethren.
and these are the generations of Isaac Abraham s son Abraham
begat Isaac
and Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife
the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padanaram the sister to
Laban the Syrian.
and Isaac intreated the lord for his wife because she was
barren and the lord was intreated of him and Rebekah his
wife conceived.
and the children struggled together within her and she said
if it be so why Am I thus? and she went to enquire of the
lord.
and the lord said unto her two nations are in thy womb and
two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels and
the one people shall be stronger than the other people and
the elder shall serve the younger.
and when her days to be delivered were fulfilled behold
there were twins in her womb.
and the first came out red all over like an hairy garment
and they called his name Esau.
and after that came his brother out and his hand took hold on
Esau s heel and his name was called Jacob and Isaac was
threescore years old when she bare them.
and the boys grew and Esau was a cunning hunter a man of the
field and Jacob was a plain man dwelling in tents.
and Isaac loved Esau because he did eat of his venison but
Rebekah loved Jacob.
and Jacob sod pottage and Esau came from the field and he
was faint
and Esau said to Jacob feed me I pray thee with that same
red pottage for I Am faint therefore was his name called
Edom.
and Jacob said sell me this day thy birthright.
and Esau said behold I Am at the point to die and what
profit shall this birthright do to me?
and Jacob said swear to me this day and he sware unto him
and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.
then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles and he did
eat and drink and rose up and went his way thus Esau
despised his birthright.
and there was a famine in the land beside the first famine
that was in the days of Abraham. and Isaac went unto Abimelech
king of the Philistines unto Gerar.
and the lord appeared unto him and said go not down into
Egypt dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of
Sojourn in this land and I will be with thee and will bless
thee for unto thee and unto thy seed I will give all these
countries and I will perform the oath which I sware unto
Abraham thy father
and I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven
and will give unto thy seed all these countries and in thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed
because that Abraham obeyed my voice and kept my charge my
commandments my statutes and my laws.
and Isaac dwelt in Gerar
and the men of the place asked him of his wife and he said
she is my sister for he feared to say she is my wife lest
said he the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah
because she was fair to look upon.
and it came to pass when he had been there a long time that
Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window and
saw and behold Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife.
and Abimelech called Isaac and said behold of a surety she
is thy wife and how saidst thou she is my sister? and Isaac
said unto him because I said lest I die for her.
and Abimelech said what is this thou hast done unto us? one
of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife and thou
shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.
and Abimelech charged all his people saying he that toucheth
this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.
then Isaac sowed in that land and received in the same year
an hundredfold and the lord blessed him.
and the man waxed great and went forward and grew until he
became very great
for he had possession of flocks and possession of herds and
great store of servants and the Philistines envied him.
for all the wells which his father s servants had digged in
the days of Abraham his father the Philistines had stopped
them and filled them with earth.
and Abimelech said unto Isaac go from us for thou art Much
mightier than we.
and Isaac departed thence and pitched his tent in the valley
of Gerar and dwelt there.
and Isaac digged again the wells of water which they had
digged in the days of Abraham his father for the Philistines
had stopped them after the death of Abraham and he called
their names after the names by which his father had called
them.
and Isaac s servants digged in the valley and found there a
well of springing water.
and the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac s herdmen
saying the water is ours and he called the name of the well
Esek because they strove with him.
and they digged another well and strove for that also and he
called the name of it Sitnah.
and he removed from thence and digged another well and for
that they strove not and he called the name of it Rehoboth
and he said for now the lord hath made room for us and we
shall be fruitful in the land.
and he went up from thence to Beersheba.
and the lord appeared unto him the same night and said I Am
the God of Abraham thy father fear not for I Am with thee
and will bless thee and multiply thy seed for my servant
Abraham s sake.
and he builded an altar there and called upon the name of the
lord and pitched his tent there and there Isaac s servants
digged a well.
then Abimelech went to him from Gerar and Ahuzzath one of his
friends and Phichol the chief captain of his army.
and Isaac said unto them wherefore come ye to me seeing ye
hate me and have sent me away from you?
and they said we saw certainly that the lord was with thee
and we said let there be now an oath betwixt us even betwixt
us and thee and let us make a covenant with thee
that thou wilt do us no hurt as we have not touched thee and
as we have done unto thee nothing but good and have sent thee
away in peace thou art now the blessed of the lord.
and he made them a feast and they did eat and drink.
and they rose up betimes in the morning and sware one to
another and Isaac sent them away and they departed from him
in peace.
and it came to pass the same day that Isaac s servants came
and told him concerning the well which they had digged and
said unto him we have found water.
and he called it Shebah therefore the name of the city is
Beersheba unto this day.
and Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the
daughter of Beeri the Hittite and Bashemath the daughter of
Elon the Hittite
which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.
and it came to pass that when Isaac was old and his eyes
were dim so that he could not see he called Esau his eldest
son and said unto him my son and he said unto him behold
here Am I.
and he said behold now I Am old I know not the day of my
death
now therefore take I pray thee thy weapons thy quiver and
thy bow and go out to the field and take me some venison
and make me savoury meat such as I love and bring it to me
that I may eat that my soul may bless thee before I die.
and Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. and Esau
went to the field to hunt for venison and to bring it.
and Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son saying behold I heard
thy father speak unto Esau thy brother saying
bring me venison and make me savoury meat that I may eat
and bless thee before the lord before my death.
now therefore my son obey my voice according to that which I
command thee.
go now to the flock and fetch me from thence two good kids of
the goats and I will make them savoury meat for thy father
such as he loveth
and thou shalt bring it to thy father that he may eat and
that he may bless thee before his death.
and Jacob said to Rebekah his mother behold Esau my brother
is a hairy man and I Am a smooth man
my father peradventure will feel me and I shall seem to him
as a deceiver and I shall bring a curse upon me and not a
blessing.
and his mother said unto him upon me be thy curse my son
only obey my voice and go fetch me them.
and he went and fetched and brought them to his mother and
his mother made savoury meat such as his father loved.
and Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau which
were with her in the house and put them upon Jacob her
younger son
and she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands
and upon the smooth of his neck
and she gave the savoury meat and the bread which she had
prepared into the hand of her son Jacob.
and he came unto his father and said my father and he said
here Am I who art thou my son?
and Jacob said unto his father I Am Esau thy first born I
have done according as thou badest me Arise I pray thee sit
and eat of my venison that thy soul may bless me.
and Isaac said unto his son how is it that thou hast found it
so quickly my son? and he said because the lord thy God
brought it to me.
and Isaac said unto Jacob come near I pray thee that I may
feel thee my son whether thou be my very son Esau or not.
and Jacob went near unto Isaac his father and he felt him
and said the voice is Jacob s voice but the hands are the
hands of Esau.
and he discerned him not because his hands were hairy as his
brother Esau s hands so he blessed him.
and he said art thou my very son Esau? and he said I Am.
and he said bring it near to me and I will eat of my son s
venison that my soul may bless thee. and he brought it near
to him and he did eat and he brought him wine and he drank.
and his father Isaac said unto him come near now and Kiss
me my son.
and he came near and kissed him and he smelled the smell of
his raiment and blessed him and said see the smell of my
son is as the smell of a field which the lord hath blessed
therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven and the fatness
of the earth and plenty of corn and wine
let people serve thee and nations bow down to thee be lord
over thy brethren and let thy mother s sons bow down to thee
cursed be every one that curseth thee and blessed be he that
blesseth thee.
and it came to pass as soon as Isaac had made an end of
blessing Jacob and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the
presence of Isaac his father that Esau his brother came in
from his hunting.
and he also had made savoury meat and brought it unto his
father and said unto his father let my father Arise and eat
of his son s venison that thy soul may bless me.
and Isaac his father said unto him who art thou? and he said
I Am thy son thy firstborn Esau.
and Isaac trembled very exceedingly and said who? where is
he that hath taken venison and brought it me and I have
eaten of all before thou camest and have blessed him? yea
and he shall be blessed.
and when Esau heard the words of his father he cried with a
great and exceeding bitter cry and said unto his father
bless me even me also O my father.
and he said thy brother came with subtilty and hath taken
away thy blessing.
and he said is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath
supplanted me these two times he took away my birthright
and behold now he hath taken away my blessing. and he said
hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?
and Isaac answered and said unto Esau behold I have made him
thy lord and all his brethren have I given to him for
servants and with corn and wine have I sustained him and
what shall I do now unto thee my son?
and Esau said unto his father hast thou but one blessing my
father? bless me even me also O my father. and Esau lifted
up his voice and wept.
and Isaac his father answered and said unto him behold thy
dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth and of the dew of
heaven from above
and by thy sword shalt thou live and shalt serve thy brother
and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion
that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.
and Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed him and Esau said in his heart the days of
mourning for my father are at hand then will I slay my
brother Jacob.
and these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah
and she sent and called Jacob her younger son and said unto
him behold thy brother Esau as touching thee doth comfort
himself purposing to kill thee.
now therefore my son obey my voice Arise flee thou to
Laban my brother to Haran
and tarry with him a few days until thy brother s fury turn
away
until thy brother s anger turn away from thee and he forget
that which thou hast done to him then I will send and fetch
thee from thence why should I be deprived also of you both in
one day?
and Rebekah said to Isaac I Am weary of my life because of
the daughters of Heth if Jacob take a wife of the daughters
of Heth such as these which are of the daughters of the land
what good shall my life do me?
and Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and charged him and
said unto him thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of
Canaan.
Arise go to Padanaram to the house of Bethuel thy mother s
father and take thee a wife from thence of the daughers of
Laban thy mother s brother.
and God almighty bless thee and make thee fruitful and
multiply thee that thou mayest be a multitude of people
and give thee the blessing of Abraham to thee and to thy
seed with thee that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou
art a stranger which God gave unto Abraham.
and Isaac sent away Jacob and he went to Padanaram unto
Laban son of Bethuel the Syrian the brother of Rebekah
Jacob s and Esau s mother.
when Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away
to Padanaram to take him a wife from thence and that as he
blessed him he gave him a charge saying thou shalt not take
a wife of the daughers of Canaan
and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother and was gone
to Padanaram
and Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac
his father
then went Esau unto Ishmael and took unto the wives which he
had Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham s son the sister
of Nebajoth to be his wife.
and Jacob went out from Beersheba and went toward Haran.
and he lighted upon a certain place and tarried there all
night because the sun was set and he took of the stones of
that place and put them for his pillows and lay down in that
place to sleep.
and he dreamed and behold a ladder set up on the earth and
the top of it reached to heaven and behold the angels of God
ascending and descending on it.
and behold the lord stood above it and said I Am the lord
God of Abraham thy father and the God of Isaac the land
whereon thou liest to thee will I give it and to thy seed
and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth and thou shalt
spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north
and to the south and in thee and in thy seed shall all the
families of the earth be blessed.
and behold I Am with thee and will keep thee in all places
whither thou goest and will bring thee again into this land
for I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have
spoken to thee of.
and Jacob awaked out of his sleep and he said surely the
lord is in this place and I knew it not.
and he was afraid and said how dreadful is this place this
is none other but the house of God and this is the gate of
heaven.
and Jacob rose up early in the morning and took the stone
that he had put for his pillows and set it up for a pillar
and poured oil upon the top of it.
and he called the name of that place Bethel but the name of
that city was called Luz at the first.
and Jacob vowed a vow saying if God will be with me and
will keep me in this way that I go and will give me bread to
eat and raiment to put on
so that I come again to my father s house in peace then shall
the lord be my God
and this stone which I have set for a pillar shall be God s
house and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give
the tenth unto thee.
then Jacob went on his journey and came into the land of the
people of the east.
and he looked and behold a well in the field and lo there
were three flocks of sheep lying by it for out of that well
they watered the flocks and a great stone was upon the well s
mouth.
and thither were all the flocks gathered and they rolled the
stone from the well s mouth and watered the sheep and put
the stone again upon the well s mouth in his place.
and Jacob said unto them my brethren whence be ye? and they
said of Haran are we.
and he said unto them know ye Laban the son of Nahor? and
they said we know him.
and he said unto them is he well? and they said he is well
and behold Rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep.
and he said lo it is yet high day Neither is it time that
the cattle should be gathered together water ye the sheep
and go and feed them.
and they said we cannot until all the flocks be gathered
together and till they roll the stone from the well s mouth
then we water the sheep.
and while he yet spake with them Rachel came with her
father s sheep for she kept them.
and it came to pass when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of
Laban his mother s brother and the sheep of Laban his
mother s brother that Jacob went near and rolled the stone
from the well s mouth and watered the flock of Laban his
mother s brother.
and Jacob kissed Rachel and lifted up his voice and wept.
and Jacob told Rachel that he was her father s brother and
that he was Rebekah s son and she ran and told her father.
and it came to pass when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his
sister s son that he ran to meet him and embraced him and
kissed him and brought him to his house. and he told Laban
all these things.
and Laban said to him surely thou art my bone and my flesh.
and he abode with him the space of a month.
and Laban said unto Jacob because thou art my brother
shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me what
shall thy wages be?
and Laban had two daughters the name of the elder was Leah
and the name of the younger was Rachel.
Leah was tender eyed but Rachel was beautiful and well
favoured.
and Jacob loved Rachel and said I will serve thee seven
years for Rachel thy younger daughter.
and Laban said it is better that I give her to thee than
that I should give her to another man abide with me.
and Jacob served seven years for Rachel and they seemed unto
him but a few days for the love he had to her.
and Jacob said unto Laban give me my wife for my days are
fulfilled that I may go in unto her.
and Laban gathered together all the men of the place and made
a feast.
and it came to pass in the evening that he took Leah his
daughter and brought her to him and he went in unto her.
and Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for an
handmaid.
and it came to pass that in the morning behold it was Leah
and he said to Laban what is this thou hast done unto me? did
not I serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore then hast thou
beguiled me?
and Laban said it must not be so done in our country to give
the younger before the firstborn.
fulfil her week and we will give thee this also for the
service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.
and Jacob did so and fulfilled her week and he gave him
Rachel his daughter to wife also.
and Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to
be her maid.
and he went in also unto Rachel and he loved also Rachel more
than Leah and served with him yet seven other years.
and when the lord saw that Leah was hated he opened her womb
but Rachel was barren.
and Leah conceived and bare a son and she called his name
Reuben for she said surely the lord hath looked upon my
affliction now therefore my husband will love me.
and she conceived again and bare a son and said because the
lord hath heard I was hated he hath therefore given me this
son also and she called his name Simeon.
and she conceived again and bare a son and said now this
time will my husband be joined unto me because I have born
him three sons therefore was his name called Levi.
and she conceived again and bare a son and she said now
will I praise the lord therefore she called his name Judah
and left bearing.
and when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children Rachel
envied her sister and said unto Jacob give me children or
else I die.
and Jacob s anger was kindled against Rachel and he said Am
I in God s stead who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the
womb?
and she said behold my maid Bilhah go in unto her and she
shall bear upon my knees that I may also have children by
her.
and she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife and Jacob went
in unto her.
and Bilhah conceived and bare Jacob a son.
and Rachel said God hath judged me and hath also heard my
voice and hath given me a son therefore called she his name
Dan.
and Bilhah Rachel s maid conceived again and bare Jacob a
second son.
and Rachel said with great wrestlings have I wrestled with my
sister and I have prevailed and she called his name
Naphtali.
when Leah saw that she had left bearing she took Zilpah her
maid and gave her Jacob to wife.
and Zilpah Leah s maid bare Jacob a son.
and Leah said a troop cometh and she called his name Gad.
and Zilpah Leah s maid bare Jacob a second son.
and Leah said happy Am I for the daughters will call me
blessed and she called his name Asher.
and Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest and found
mandrakes in the field and brought them unto his mother Leah.
then Rachel said to Leah give me I pray thee of thy son s
mandrakes.
and she said unto her is it a small matter that thou hast
taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son s
mandrakes also? and Rachel said therefore he shall lie with
thee to night for thy son s mandrakes.
and Jacob came out of the field in the evening and Leah went
out to meet him and said thou must come in unto me for
surely I have hired thee with my son s mandrakes. and he lay
with her that night.
and God hearkened unto Leah and she conceived and bare Jacob
the fifth son.
and Leah said God hath given me my hire because I have given
my maiden to my husband and she called his name Issachar.
and Leah conceived again and bare Jacob the sixth son.
and Leah said God hath endued me with a good dowry now will
my husband dwell with me because I have born him six sons
and she called his name Zebulun.
and afterwards she bare a daughter and called her name Dinah.
and God remembered Rachel and God hearkened to her and
opened her womb.
and she conceived and bare a son and said God hath taken
away my reproach
and she called his name Joseph and said the lord shall add
to me another son.
and it came to pass when Rachel had born Joseph that Jacob
said unto Laban send me away that I may go unto mine own
place and to my country.
give me my wives and my children for whom I have served thee
and let me go for thou knowest my service which I have done
thee.
and Laban said unto him I pray thee if I have found favour
in thine eyes tarry for I have learned by experience that
the lord hath blessed me for thy sake.
and he said appoint me thy wages and I will give it.
and he said unto him thou knowest how I have served thee and
how thy cattle was with me.
for it was little which thou hadst before I came and it is
now increased unto a multitude and the lord hath blessed thee
since my coming and now when shall I provide for mine own
house also?
and he said what shall I give thee? and Jacob said thou
shalt not give me any thing if thou wilt do this thing for
me I will again feed and keep thy flock.
I will pass through all thy flock to day removing from thence
all the speckled and spotted cattle and all the brown cattle
among the sheep and the spotted and speckled among the goats
and of such shall be my hire.
so shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come when
it shall come for my hire before thy face every one that is
not speckled and spotted among the goats and brown among the
sheep that shall be counted stolen with me.
and Laban said behold I would it might be according to thy
word.
and he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and
spotted and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted
and every one that had some white in it and all the brown
among the sheep and gave them into the hand of his sons.
and he set three days journey betwixt himself and Jacob and
Jacob fed the rest of Laban s flocks.
and Jacob took him rods of green poplar and of the hazel and
chesnut tree and pilled white strakes in them and made the
white appear which was in the rods.
and he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in
the gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to
drink that they should conceive when they came to drink.
and the flocks conceived before the rods and brought forth
cattle ringstraked speckled and spotted.
and Jacob did separate the lambs and set the faces of the
flocks toward the ringstraked and all the brown in the flock
of Laban and he put his own flocks by themselves and put
them not unto Laban s cattle.
and it came to pass whensoever the stronger cattle did
conceive that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the
cattle in the gutters that they might conceive among the
rods.
but when the cattle were feeble he put them not in so the
feebler were Laban s and the stronger Jacob s.
and the man increased exceedingly and had Much cattle and
maidservants and menservants and camels and asses.
and he heard the words of Laban s sons saying Jacob hath
taken away all that was our father s and of that which was
our father s hath he gotten all this glory.
and Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban and behold it was
not toward him as before.
and the lord said unto Jacob return unto the land of thy
fathers and to thy kindred and I will be with thee.
and Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto
his flock
and said unto them I see your father s countenance that it
is not toward me as before but the God of my father hath been
with me.
and ye know that with all my power I have served your father.
and your father hath deceived me and changed my wages Ten
times but God suffered him not to hurt me.
if he said thus the speckled shall be thy wages then all the
cattle bare speckled and if he said thus the ringstraked
shall be thy hire then bare all the cattle ringstraked.
thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father and given
them to me.
and it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived
that I lifted up mine eyes and saw in a dream and behold
the rams which leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked
speckled and grisled.
and the angel of God spake unto me in a dream saying Jacob
and I said here Am I.
and he said lift up now thine eyes and see all the rams
which leap upon the cattle are ringstraked speckled and
grisled for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
I Am the God of Bethel where thou anointedst the pillar and
where thou vowedst a vow unto me now Arise get thee out from
this land and return unto the land of thy kindred.
and Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him is there yet
any portion or inheritance for us in our father s house?
are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us and
hath quite devoured also our money.
for all the Riches which God hath taken from our father that
is ours and our children s now then whatsoever God hath
said unto thee do.
then Jacob rose up and set his sons and his wives upon
camels
and he carried away all his cattle and all his goods which he
had gotten the cattle of his getting which he had gotten in
Padanaram for to go to Isaac his father in the land of
Canaan.
and Laban went to shear his sheep and Rachel had stolen the
images that were her father s.
and Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian in that he
told him not that he fled.
so he fled with all that he had and he rose up and passed
over the river and set his face toward the mount Gilead.
and it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.
and he took his brethren with him and pursued after him seven
days journey and they overtook him in the mount Gilead.
and God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night and said
unto him take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good
or bad.
then Laban overtook Jacob. now Jacob had pitched his tent in
the mount and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of
Gilead.
and Laban said to Jacob what hast thou done that thou hast
stolen away unawares to me and carried away my daughters as
captives taken with the sword?
wherefore didst thou flee away secretly and steal away from
me and didst not tell me that I might have sent thee away
with mirth and with songs with tabret and with harp?
and hast not suffered me to Kiss my sons and my daughters?
thou hast now done foolishly in so doing.
it is in the power of my hand to do you hurt but the God of
your father spake unto me yesternight saying take thou heed
that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
and now though thou wouldest needs be gone because thou sore
longedst after thy father s house yet wherefore hast thou
stolen my gods?
and Jacob answered and said to Laban because I was afraid
for I said peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy
daughters from me.
with whomsoever thou findest thy gods let him not live
before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me and
take it to thee. for Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen
them.
and Laban went into Jacob s tent and into Leah s tent and
into the two maidservants tents but he found them not. then
went he out of Leah s tent and entered into Rachel s tent.
now Rachel had taken the images and put them in the camel s
furniture and sat upon them. and Laban searched all the tent
but found them not.
and she said to her father let it not displease my lord that
I cannot rise up before thee for the custom of women is upon
me. and he searched but found not the images.
and Jacob was wroth and chode with Laban and Jacob answered
and said to Laban what is my trespass? what is my Sin that
thou hast so hotly pursued after me?
whereas thou hast searched all my stuff what hast thou found
of all thy household stuff? set it here before my brethren and
thy brethren that they may judge betwixt us both.
this twenty years have I been with thee thy ewes and thy she
goats have not cast their young and the rams of thy flock
have I not eaten.
that which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee I bare
the loss of it of my hand didst thou require it whether
stolen by day or stolen by night.
thus I was in the day the drought consumed me and the frost
by night and my sleep departed from mine eyes.
thus have I been twenty years in thy house I served thee
fourteen years for thy two daughters and six years for thy
cattle and thou hast changed my wages Ten times.
except the God of my father the God of Abraham and the fear
of Isaac had been with me surely thou hadst sent me away now
empty. God hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my
hands and rebuked thee yesternight.
and Laban answered and said unto Jacob these daughters are my
daughters and these children are my children and these
cattle are my cattle and all that thou seest is mine and
what can I do this day unto these my daughters or unto their
children which they have born?
now therefore come thou let us make a covenant I and thou
and let it be for a witness between me and thee.
and Jacob took a stone and set it up for a pillar.
and Jacob said unto his brethren gather stones and they took
stones and made an heap and they did eat there upon the
heap.
and Laban called it Jegarsahadutha but Jacob called it
Galeed.
and Laban said this heap is a witness between me and thee
this day. therefore was the name of it called Galeed
and Mizpah for he said the lord watch between me and thee
when we are absent one from another.
if thou shalt afflict my daughters or if thou shalt take
other wives beside my daughters no man is with us see God
is witness betwixt me and thee.
and Laban said to Jacob behold this heap and behold this
pillar which I have cast betwixt me and thee
this heap be witness and this pillar be witness that I will
not pass over this heap to thee and that thou shalt not pass
over this heap and this pillar unto me for harm.
the God of Abraham and the God of Nahor the God of their
father judge betwixt us. and Jacob sware by the fear of his
father Isaac.
then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount and called his
brethren to eat bread and they did eat bread and tarried all
night in the mount.
and early in the morning Laban rose up and kissed his sons
and his daughters and blessed them and Laban departed and
returned unto his place.
and Jacob went on his way and the angels of God met him.
and when Jacob saw them he said this is God s host and he
called the name of that place Mahanaim.
and Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto
the land of Seir the country of Edom.
and he commanded them saying thus shall ye speak unto my
lord Esau thy servant Jacob saith thus I have sojourned with
Laban and stayed there until now
and I have oxen and asses flocks and menservants and
womenservants and I have sent to tell my lord that I may
find grace in thy sight.
and the messengers returned to Jacob saying we came to thy
brother Esau and also he cometh to meet thee and four
hundred men with him.
then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed and he divided
the people that was with him and the flocks and herds and
the camels into two Bands
and said if Esau come to the one company and smite it then
the other company which is left shall escape.
and Jacob said O God of my father Abraham and God of my
father Isaac the lord which saidst unto me return unto thy
country and to thy kindred and I will deal well with thee
I Am not worthy of the least of all the mercies and of all
the truth which thou hast shewed unto thy servant for with
my staff I passed over this Jordan and now I Am become two
Bands.
deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my brother from the
hand of Esau for I fear him lest he will come and smite me
and the mother with the children.
and thou saidst I will surely do thee good and make thy seed
as the sand of the sea which cannot be numbered for
multitude.
and he lodged there that same night and took of that which
came to his hand a present for Esau his brother
two hundred she goats and twenty he goats two hundred ewes
and twenty rams
thirty milch camels with their colts forty kine and Ten
bulls twenty she asses and Ten foals.
and he delivered them into the hand of his servants every
drove by themselves and said unto his servants pass over
before me and put a space betwixt drove and drove.
and he commanded the foremost saying when Esau my brother
meeteth thee and asketh thee saying whose art thou? and
whither goest thou? and whose are these before thee?
then thou shalt say they be thy servant Jacob s it is a
present sent unto my lord Esau and behold also he is behind
us.
and so commanded he the second and the third and all that
followed the droves saying on this manner shall ye speak
unto Esau when ye find him.
and say ye moreover behold thy servant Jacob is behind us.
for he said I will appease him with the present that goeth
before me and afterward I will see his face peradventure he
will accept of me.
so went the present over before him and himself lodged that
night in the company.
and he rose up that night and took his two wives and his two
womenservants and his eleven sons and passed over the ford
Jabbok.
and he took them and sent them over the brook and sent over
that he had.
and Jacob was left alone and there wrestled a man with him
until the breaking of the day.
and when he saw that he prevailed not against him he touched
the hollow of his thigh and the hollow of Jacob s thigh was
out of joint as he wrestled with him.
and he said let me go for the day breaketh. and he said I
will not let thee go except thou bless me.
and he said unto him what is thy name? and he said Jacob.
and he said thy name shall be called no more Jacob but
Israel for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men
and hast prevailed.
and Jacob asked him and said tell me I pray thee thy name.
and he said wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name?
and he blessed him there.
and Jacob called the name of the place Peniel for I have seen
God face to face and my life is preserved.
and as he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him and he
halted upon his thigh.
therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which
shrank which is upon the hollow of the thigh unto this day
because he touched the hollow of Jacob s thigh in the sinew
that shrank.
and Jacob lifted up his eyes and looked and behold Esau
came and with him four hundred men. and he divided the
children unto Leah and unto Rachel and unto the two
handmaids.
and he put the handmaids and their children foremost and Leah
and her children after and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.
and he passed over before them and bowed himself to the
ground seven times until he came near to his brother.
and Esau ran to meet him and embraced him and fell on his
neck and kissed him and they wept.
and he lifted up his eyes and saw the women and the children
and said who are those with thee? and he said the children
which God hath graciously given thy servant.
then the handmaidens came near they and their children and
they bowed themselves.
and Leah also with her children came near and bowed
themselves and after came Joseph near and Rachel and they
bowed themselves.
and he said what meanest thou by all this drove which I met?
and he said these are to find grace in the sight of my lord.
and Esau said I have enough my brother keep that thou hast
unto thyself.
and Jacob said nay I pray thee if now I have found grace in
thy sight then receive my present at my hand for therefore I
have seen thy face as though I had seen the face of God and
thou wast pleased with me.
take I pray thee my blessing that is brought to thee
because God hath dealt graciously with me and because I have
enough. and he urged him and he took it.
and he said let us take our journey and let us go and I
will go before thee.
and he said unto him my lord knoweth that the children are
tender and the flocks and herds with young are with me and
if men should overdrive them one day all the flock will die.
let my lord I pray thee pass over before his servant and I
will lead on softly according as the cattle that goeth before
me and the children be able to endure until I come unto my
lord unto Seir.
and Esau said let me now leave with thee some of the folk
that are with me. and he said what needeth it? let me find
grace in the sight of my lord.
so Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.
and Jacob journeyed to Succoth and built him an house and
made booths for his cattle therefore the name of the place is
called Succoth.
and Jacob came to Shalem a city of Shechem which is in the
land of Canaan when he came from Padanaram and pitched his
tent before the city.
and he bought a parcel of a field where he had spread his
tent at the hand of the children of Hamor Shechem s father
for an hundred pieces of money.
and he erected there an altar and called it Eleloheisrael.
and Dinah the daughter of Leah which she bare unto Jacob
went out to see the daughters of the land.
and when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite prince of the
country saw her he took her and lay with her and defiled
her.
and his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob and he
loved the damsel and spake kindly unto the damsel.
and Shechem spake unto his father Hamor saying get me this
damsel to wife.
and Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter now
his sons were with his cattle in the field and Jacob held his
peace until they were come.
and Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to commune
with him.
and the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard
it and the men were grieved and they were very wroth
because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob s
daughter which thing ought not to be done.
and Hamor communed with them saying the soul of my son
Shechem longeth for your daughter I pray you give her him to
wife.
and make ye marriages with us and give your daughters unto
us and take our daughters unto you.
and ye shall dwell with us and the land shall be before you
dwell and trade ye therein and get you possessions therein.
and Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren let me
find grace in your eyes and what ye shall say unto me I will
give.
ask me never so Much dowry and gift and I will give according
as ye shall say unto me but give me the damsel to wife.
and the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father
deceitfully and said because he had defiled Dinah their
sister
and they said unto them we cannot do this thing to give our
sister to one that is uncircumcised for that were a reproach
unto us
but in this will we consent unto you if ye will be as we be
that every Male of you be circumcised
then will we give our daughters unto you and we will take
your daughters to us and we will dwell with you and we will
become one people.
but if ye will not hearken unto us to be circumcised then
will we take our daughter and we will be gone.
and their words pleased Hamor and Shechem Hamor s son.
and the young man deferred not to do the thing because he had
delight in Jacob s daughter and he was more honourable than
all the house of his father.
and Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their
city and communed with the men of their city saying
these men are peaceable with us therefore let them dwell in
the land and trade therein for the land behold it is large
enough for them let us take their daughters to us for wives
and let us give them our daughters.
only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us
to be one people if every Male among us be circumcised as
they are circumcised.
shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of
their s be our s? only let us consent unto them and they will
dwell with us.
and unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that
went out of the gate of his city and every Male was
circumcised all that went out of the gate of his city.
and it came to pass on the third day when they were sore
that two of the sons of Jacob Simeon and Levi Dinah s
brethren took each man his sword and came upon the city
boldly and slew all the males.
and they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the
sword and took Dinah out of Shechem s house and went out.
the sons of Jacob came upon the slain and spoiled the city
because they had defiled their sister.
they took their sheep and their oxen and their asses and
that which was in the city and that which was in the field
and all their wealth and all their little ones and their
wives took they captive and spoiled even all that was in the
house.
and Jacob said to Simeon and Levi ye have troubled me to make
me to stink among the inhabitants of the land among the
Canaanites and the Perizzites and I being few in number they
shall gather themselves together against me and slay me and
I shall be destroyed I and my house.
and they said should he deal with our sister as with an
harlot?
and God said unto Jacob Arise go up to Bethel and dwell
there and make there an altar unto God that appeared unto
thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.
then Jacob said unto his household and to all that were with
him put away the strange gods that are among you and be
clean and change your garments
and let us Arise and go up to Bethel and I will make there
an altar unto God who answered me in the day of my distress
and was with me in the way which I went.
and they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in
their hand and all their earrings which were in their ears
and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.
and they journeyed and the terror of God was upon the cities
that were round about them and they did not pursue after the
sons of Jacob.
so Jacob came to Luz which is in the land of Canaan that is
Bethel he and all the people that were with him.
and he built there an altar and called the place Elbethel
because there God appeared unto him when he fled from the
face of his brother.
but Deborah Rebekah s nurse died and she was buried beneath
Bethel under an oak and the name of it was called
Allonbachuth.
and God appeared unto Jacob again when he came out of
Padanaram and blessed him.
and God said unto him thy name is Jacob thy name shall not
be called any more Jacob but Israel shall be thy name and he
called his name Israel.
and God said unto him I Am God almighty be fruitful and
multiply a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee
and kings shall come out of thy loins
and the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac to thee I will
give it and to thy seed after thee will I give the land.
and God went up from him in the place where he talked with
him.
and Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with
him even a pillar of stone and he poured a drink offering
thereon and he poured oil thereon.
and Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with
him Bethel.
and they journeyed from Bethel and there was but a little way
to come to Ephrath and Rachel travailed and she had hard
labour.
and it came to pass when she was in hard labour that the
midwife said unto her fear not thou shalt have this son
also.
and it came to pass as her soul was in departing for she
died that she called his name Benoni but his father called
him Benjamin.
and Rachel died and was buried in the way to Ephrath which
is Bethlehem.
and Jacob set a pillar upon her grave that is the pillar of
Rachel s grave unto this day.
and Israel journeyed and spread his tent beyond the tower of
Edar.
and it came to pass when Israel dwelt in that land that
Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father s concubine and
Israel heard it. now the sons of Jacob were twelve
the sons of Leah Reuben Jacob s firstborn and Simeon and
Levi and Judah and Issachar and Zebulun
the sons of Rachel Joseph and Benjamin
and the sons of Bilhah Rachel s handmaid Dan and Naphtali
and the sons of Zilpah Leah s handmaid Gad and Asher these
are the sons of Jacob which were born to him in Padanaram.
and Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre unto the city
of Arbah which is Hebron where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
and the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.
and Isaac gave up the ghost and died and was gathered unto
his people being old and full of days and his sons Esau and
Jacob buried him.
now these are the generations of Esau who is Edom.
Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan Adah the
daughter of Elon the Hittite and Aholibamah the daughter of
Anah the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite
and Bashemath Ishmael s daughter sister of Nebajoth.
and Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz and Bashemath bare Reuel
and Aholibamah bare Jeush and Jaalam and Korah these are
the sons of Esau which were born unto him in the land of
Canaan.
and Esau took his wives and his sons and his daughters and
all the persons of his house and his cattle and all his
beasts and all his substance which he had got in the land of
Canaan and went into the country from the face of his brother
Jacob.
for their Riches were more than that they might dwell
together and the land wherein they were strangers could not
bear them because of their cattle.
thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir Esau is Edom.
and these are the generations of Esau the father of the
Edomites in mount Seir
these are the names of Esau s sons Eliphaz the son of Adah
the wife of Esau Reuel the son of Bashemath the wife of Esau.
and the sons of Eliphaz were Teman Omar Zepho and Gatam
and Kenaz.
and Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau s son and she bare to
Eliphaz Amalek these were the sons of Adah Esau s wife.
and these are the sons of Reuel Nahath and Zerah Shammah
and Mizzah these were the sons of Bashemath Esau s wife.
and these were the sons of Aholibamah the daughter of Anah
the daughter of Zibeon Esau s wife and she bare to Esau
Jeush and Jaalam and Korah.
these were dukes of the sons of Esau the sons of Eliphaz the
firstborn son of Esau Duke Teman Duke Omar Duke Zepho Duke
Kenaz
Duke Korah Duke Gatam and Duke Amalek these are the dukes
that came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom these were the sons
of Adah.
and these are the sons of Reuel Esau s son Duke Nahath Duke
Zerah Duke Shammah Duke Mizzah these are the dukes that
came of Reuel in the land of Edom these are the sons of
Bashemath Esau s wife.
and these are the sons of Aholibamah Esau s wife Duke Jeush
Duke Jaalam Duke Korah these were the dukes that came of
Aholibamah the daughter of Anah Esau s wife.
these are the sons of Esau who is Edom and these are their
dukes.
these are the sons of Seir the Horite who inhabited the land
Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and Anah
and Dishon and Ezer and Dishan these are the dukes of the
Horites the children of Seir in the land of Edom.
and the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam and Lotan s
sister was Timna.
and the children of Shobal were these Alvan and Manahath
and ebal Shepho and Onam.
and these are the children of Zibeon both Ajah and Anah
this was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness as
he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.
and the children of Anah were these Dishon and Aholibamah
the daughter of Anah.
and these are the children of Dishon Hemdan and Eshban and
Ithran and Cheran.
the children of Ezer are these Bilhan and Zaavan and Akan.
the children of Dishan are these Uz and Aran.
these are the dukes that came of the Horites Duke Lotan Duke
Shobal Duke Zibeon Duke Anah
Duke Dishon Duke Ezer Duke Dishan these are the dukes that
came of Hori among their dukes in the land of Seir.
and these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom
before there reigned any king over the children of Israel.
and Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom and the name of his
city was Dinhabah.
and Bela died and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in
his stead.
and Jobab died and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in
his stead.
and Husham died and Hadad the son of Bedad who smote Midian
in the field of Moab reigned in his stead and the name of
his city was Avith.
and Hadad died and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
and Samlah died and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in
his stead.
and Saul died and Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his
stead.
and Baalhanan the son of Achbor died and Hadar reigned in his
stead and the name of his city was Pau and his wife s name
was Mehetabel the daughter of Matred the daughter of
Mezahab.
and these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau
according to their families after their places by their
names Duke Timnah Duke Alvah Duke Jetheth
Duke Aholibamah Duke Elah Duke Pinon
Duke Kenaz Duke Teman Duke Mibzar
Duke Magdiel Duke Iram these be the dukes of Edom according
to their habitations in the land of their possession he is
Esau the father of the Edomites.
and Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger
in the land of Canaan.
these are the generations of Jacob. Joseph being seventeen
years old was feeding the flock with his brethren and the
lad was with the sons of Bilhah and with the sons of Zilpah
his father s wives and Joseph brought unto his father their
evil report.
now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children because he
was the son of his old age and he made him a coat of many
colours.
and when his brethren saw that their father loved him more
than all his brethren they hated him and could not speak
peaceably unto him.
and Joseph dreamed a dream and he told it his brethren and
they hated him yet the more.
and he said unto them hear I pray you this dream which I
have dreamed
for behold we were binding sheaves in the field and lo my
sheaf arose and also stood upright and behold your sheaves
stood round about and made obeisance to my sheaf.
and his brethren said to him shalt thou indeed reign over us?
or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? and they hated him
yet the more for his dreams and for his words.
and he dreamed yet another dream and told it his brethren
and said behold I have dreamed a dream more and behold
the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to
me.
and he told it to his father and to his brethren and his
father rebuked him and said unto him what is this dream that
thou hast dreamed? shall I and thy mother and thy brethren
indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?
and his brethren envied him but his father observed the
saying.
and his brethren went to feed their father s flock in Shechem.
and Israel said unto Joseph do not thy brethren feed the
flock in Shechem? come and I will send thee unto them. and he
said to him here Am I.
and he said to him go I pray thee see whether it be well
with thy brethren and well with the flocks and bring me word
again. so he sent him out of the vale of Hebron and he came
to Shechem.
and a certain man found him and behold he was wandering in
the field and the man asked him saying what seekest thou?
and he said I seek my brethren tell me I pray thee where
they feed their flocks.
and the man said they are departed hence for I heard them
say let us go to Dothan. and Joseph went after his brethren
and found them in Dothan.
and when they saw him afar off even before he came near unto
them they conspired against him to slay him.
and they said one to another behold this dreamer cometh.
come now therefore and let us slay him and cast him into
some pit and we will say some evil beast hath devoured him
and we shall see what will become of his dreams.
and Reuben heard it and he delivered him out of their hands
and said let us not kill him.
and Reuben said unto them shed no blood but cast him into
this pit that is in the wilderness and lay no hand upon him
that he might rid him out of their hands to deliver him to
his father again.
and it came to pass when Joseph was come unto his brethren
that they stript Joseph out of his coat his coat of many
colours that was on him
and they took him and cast him into a pit and the pit was
empty there was no water in it.
and they sat down to eat bread and they lifted up their eyes
and looked and behold a company of Ishmeelites came from
Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh
going to carry it down to Egypt.
and Judah said unto his brethren what profit is it if we slay
our brother and conceal his blood?
come and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites and let not our
hand be upon him for he is our brother and our flesh. and his
brethren were content.
then there passed by Midianites merchantmen and they drew and
lifted up Joseph out of the pit and sold Joseph to the
Ishmeelites for twenty pieces of Silver and they brought
Joseph into Egypt.
and Reuben returned unto the pit and behold Joseph was not
in the pit and he rent his clothes.
and he returned unto his brethren and said the child is not
and I whither shall I go?
and they took Joseph s coat and killed a kid of the goats
and dipped the coat in the blood
and they sent the coat of many colours and they brought it to
their father and said this have we found know now whether
it be thy son s coat or no.
and he knew it and said it is my son s coat an evil beast
hath devoured him Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.
and Jacob rent his clothes and put sackcloth upon his loins
and mourned for his son many days.
and all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him
but he refused to be comforted and he said for I will go
down into the grave unto my son mourning. thus his father wept
for him.
and the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar an
officer of Pharaoh s and captain of the guard.
and it came to pass at that time that Judah went down from
his brethren and turned in to a certain Adullamite whose
name was Hirah.
and Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite whose
name was Shuah and he took her and went in unto her.
and she conceived and bare a son and he called his name Er.
and she conceived again and bare a son and she called his
name Onan.
and she yet again conceived and bare a son and called his
name Shelah and he was at Chezib when she bare him.
and Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn whose name was
Tamar.
and Er Judah s firstborn was wicked in the sight of the
lord and the lord slew him.
and Judah said unto Onan go in unto thy brother s wife and
marry her and raise up seed to thy brother.
and Onan knew that the seed should not be his and it came to
pass when he went in unto his brother s wife that he spilled
it on the ground lest that he should give seed to his
brother.
and the thing which he did displeased the lord wherefore he
slew him also.
then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law remain a widow
at thy father s house till Shelah my son be grown for he
said lest peradventure he die also as his brethren did. and
Tamar went and dwelt in her father s house.
and in process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah s wife
died and Judah was comforted and went up unto his
sheepshearers to Timnath he and his friend Hirah the
Adullamite.
and it was told Tamar saying behold thy father in law goeth
up to Timnath to shear his sheep.
and she put her widow s garments off from her and covered her
with a vail and wrapped herself and sat in an open place
which is by the way to Timnath for she saw that Shelah was
grown and she was not given unto him to wife.
when Judah saw her he thought her to be an harlot because
she had covered her face.
and he turned unto her by the way and said go to I pray
thee let me come in unto thee for he knew not that she was
his daughter in law. and she said what wilt thou give me
that thou mayest come in unto me?
and he said I will send thee a kid from the flock. and she
said wilt thou give me a pledge till thou send it?
and he said what pledge shall I give thee? and she said thy
signet and thy bracelets and thy staff that is in thine
hand. and he gave it her and came in unto her and she
conceived by him.
and she arose and went away and laid by her vail from her
and put on the garments of her widowhood.
and Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the
Adullamite to receive his pledge from the woman s hand but
he found her not.
then he asked the men of that place saying where is the
harlot that was openly by the way side? and they said there
was no harlot in this place.
and he returned to Judah and said I cannot find her and
also the men of the place said that there was no harlot in
this place.
and Judah said let her take it to her lest we be Shamed
behold I sent this kid and thou hast not found her.
and it came to pass about three months after that it was told
Judah saying Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the
harlot and also behold she is with child by whoredom. and
Judah said bring her forth and let her be burnt.
when she was brought forth she sent to her father in law
saying by the man whose these are Am I with child and she
said discern I pray thee whose are these the signet and
bracelets and staff.
and Judah acknowledged them and said she hath been more
righteous than I because that I gave her not to Shelah my
son. and he knew her again no more.
and it came to pass in the time of her travail that behold
twins were in her womb.
and it came to pass when she travailed that the one put out
his hand and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a
scarlet thread saying this came out first.
and it came to pass as he drew back his hand that behold
his brother came out and she said how hast thou broken
forth? this breach be upon thee therefore his name was called
Pharez.
and afterward came out his brother that had the scarlet
thread upon his hand and his name was called Zarah.
and Joseph was brought down to Egypt and Potiphar an officer
of Pharaoh captain of the guard an Egyptian bought him of
the hands of the Ishmeelites which had brought him down
thither.
and the lord was with Joseph and he was a prosperous man and
he was in the house of his Master the Egyptian.
and his Master saw that the lord was with him and that the
lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
and Joseph found grace in his sight and he served him and he
made him overseer over his house and all that he had he put
into his hand.
and it came to pass from the time that he had made him
overseer in his house and over all that he had that the lord
blessed the Egyptian s house for Joseph s sake and the
blessing of the lord was upon all that he had in the house
and in the field.
and he left all that he had in Joseph s hand and he knew not
ought he had save the bread which he did eat. and Joseph was
a goodly person and well favoured.
and it came to pass after these things that his Master s wife
cast her eyes upon Joseph and she said lie with me.
but he refused and said unto his Master s wife behold my
Master wotteth not what is with me in the house and he hath
committed all that he hath to my hand
there is none greater in this house than I Neither hath he
kept back any thing from me but thee because thou art his
wife how then can I do this great wickedness and Sin against
God?
and it came to pass as she spake to Joseph day by day that
he hearkened not unto her to lie by her or to be with her.
and it came to pass about this time that Joseph went into the
house to do his business and there was none of the men of the
house there within.
and she caught him by his garment saying lie with me and he
left his garment in her hand and fled and got him out.
and it came to pass when she saw that he had left his garment
in her hand and was fled forth
that she called unto the men of her house and spake unto
them saying see he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us to
mock us he came in unto me to lie with me and I cried with a
loud voice
and it came to pass when he heard that I lifted up my voice
and cried that he left his garment with me and fled and got
him out.
and she laid up his garment by her until his lord came home.
and she spake unto him according to these words saying the
Hebrew servant which thou hast brought unto us came in unto
me to mock me
and it came to pass as I lifted up my voice and cried that
he left his garment with me and fled out.
and it came to pass when his Master heard the words of his
wife which she spake unto him saying after this manner did
thy servant to me that his wrath was kindled.
and Joseph s Master took him and put him into the prison a
place where the king s prisoners were bound and he was there
in the prison.
but the lord was with Joseph and shewed him mercy and gave
him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
and the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph s hand all
the prisoners that were in the prison and whatsoever they did
there he was the doer of it.
the keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was
under his hand because the lord was with him and that which
he did the lord made it to prosper.
and it came to pass after these things that the butler of the
king of Egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king
of Egypt.
and Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers against the
chief of the butlers and against the chief of the bakers.
and he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the
guard into the prison the place where Joseph was bound.
and the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them and he
served them and they continued a season in ward.
and they dreamed a dream both of them each man his dream in
one night each man according to the interpretation of his
dream the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt which
were bound in the prison.
and Joseph came in unto them in the morning and looked upon
them and behold they were sad.
and he asked Pharaoh s officers that were with him in the ward
of his lord s house saying wherefore look ye so sadly to
day?
and they said unto him we have dreamed a dream and there is
no interpreter of it. and Joseph said unto them do not
interpretations belong to God? tell me them I pray you.
and the chief butler told his dream to Joseph and said to
him in my dream behold a vine was before me
and in the vine were three branches and it was as though it
budded and her blossoms shot forth and the clusters thereof
brought forth ripe grapes
and Pharaoh s cup was in my hand and I took the grapes and
pressed them into Pharaoh s cup and I gave the cup into
Pharaoh s hand.
and Joseph said unto him this is the interpretation of it
the three branches are three days
yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head and
restore thee unto thy place and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh s
cup into his hand after the former manner when thou wast his
butler.
but think on me when it shall be well with thee and shew
kindness I pray thee unto me and make mention of me unto
Pharaoh and bring me out of this house
for indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews
and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into
the dungeon.
when the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good he
said unto Joseph I also was in my dream and behold I had
three white baskets on my head
and in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of
bakemeats for Pharaoh and the birds did eat them out of the
basket upon my head.
and Joseph answered and said this is the interpretation
thereof the three baskets are three days
yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off
thee and shall hang thee on a tree and the birds shall eat
thy flesh from off thee.
and it came to pass the third day which was Pharaoh s
birthday that he made a feast unto all his servants and he
lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker
among his servants.
and he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again
and he gave the cup into Pharaoh s hand
but he hanged the chief baker as Joseph had interpreted to
them.
yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph but forgat him.
and it came to pass at the end of two full years that Pharaoh
dreamed and behold he stood by the river.
and behold there came up out of the river seven well
favoured kine and fatfleshed and they fed in a meadow.
and behold seven other kine came up after them out of the
river ill favoured and leanfleshed and stood by the other
kine upon the brink of the river.
and the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven
well favoured and fat kine. so Pharaoh awoke.
and he slept and dreamed the second time and behold seven
ears of corn came up upon one stalk rank and good.
and behold seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind
sprung up after them.
and the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears.
and Pharaoh awoke and behold it was a dream.
and it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was
troubled and he sent and called for all the magicians of
Egypt and all the wise men thereof and Pharaoh told them his
dream but there was none that could interpret them unto
Pharaoh.
then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh saying I do
remember my faults this day
Pharaoh was wroth with his servants and put me in ward in the
captain of the guard s house both me and the chief baker
and we dreamed a dream in one night I and he we dreamed each
man according to the interpretation of his dream.
and there was there with us a young man an Hebrew servant to
the captain of the guard and we told him and he interpreted
to us our dreams to each man according to his dream he did
interpret.
and it came to pass as he interpreted to us so it was me he
restored unto mine office and him he hanged.
then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph and they brought him
hastily out of the dungeon and he shaved himself and changed
his raiment and came in unto Pharaoh.
and Pharaoh said unto Joseph I have dreamed a dream and
there is none that can interpret it and I have heard say of
thee that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it.
and Joseph answered Pharaoh saying it is not in me God
shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.
and Pharaoh said unto Joseph in my dream behold I stood
upon the bank of the river
and behold there came up out of the river seven kine
fatfleshed and well favoured and they fed in a meadow
and behold seven other kine came up after them poor and
very ill favoured and leanfleshed such as I never saw in all
the land of Egypt for badness
and the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first
seven fat kine
and when they had eaten them up it could not be known that
they had eaten them but they were still ill favoured as at
the beginning. so I awoke.
and I saw in my dream and behold seven ears came up in one
stalk full and good
and behold seven ears withered thin and blasted with the
east wind sprung up after them
and the thin ears devoured the seven good ears and I told
this unto the magicians but there was none that could declare
it to me.
and Joseph said unto Pharaoh the dream of Pharaoh is one God
hath shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do.
the seven good kine are seven years and the seven good ears
are seven years the dream is one.
and the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after
them are seven years and the seven empty ears blasted with
the east wind shall be seven years of famine.
this is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh what God
is about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh.
behold there come seven years of great plenty throughout all
the land of Egypt
and there shall Arise after them seven years of famine and
all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt and
the famine shall consume the land
and the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of
that famine following for it shall be very grievous.
and for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice it is
because the thing is established by God and God will shortly
bring it to pass.
now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise
and set him over the land of Egypt.
let Pharaoh do this and let him appoint officers over the
land and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the
seven plenteous years.
and let them gather all the food of those good years that
come and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh and let them
keep food in the cities.
and that food shall be for store to the land against the seven
years of famine which shall be in the land of Egypt that the
land perish not through the famine.
and the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh and in the eyes
of all his servants.
and Pharaoh said unto his servants can we find such a one as
this is a man in whom the spirit of God is?
and Pharaoh said unto Joseph forasmuch as God hath shewed
thee all this there is none so discreet and wise as thou art
thou shalt be over my house and according unto thy word shall
all my people be ruled only in the throne will I be greater
than thou.
and Pharaoh said unto Joseph see I have set thee over all
the land of Egypt.
and Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand and put it upon
Joseph s hand and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen and
put a gold chain about his neck
and he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had
and they cried before him bow the knee and he made him ruler
over all the land of Egypt.
and Pharaoh said unto Joseph I Am Pharaoh and without thee
shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of
Egypt.
and Pharaoh called Joseph s name Zaphnathpaaneah and he gave
him to wife Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of on.
and Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.
and Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh
king of Egypt. and Joseph went out from the presence of
Pharaoh and went throughout all the land of Egypt.
and in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by
handfuls.
and he gathered up all the food of the seven years which were
in the land of Egypt and laid up the food in the cities the
food of the field which was round about every city laid he
up in the same.
and Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea very Much
until he left numbering for it was without number.
and unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine
came which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of on
bare unto him.
and Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh for God
said he hath made me forget all my toil and all my father s
house.
and the name of the second called he Ephraim for God hath
caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.
and the seven years of plenteousness that was in the land of
Egypt were ended.
and the seven years of dearth began to come according as
Joseph had said and the dearth was in all lands but in all
the land of Egypt there was bread.
and when all the land of Egypt was famished the people cried
to Pharaoh for bread and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians
go unto Joseph what he saith to you do.
and the famine was over all the face of the earth and Joseph
opened all the storehouses and sold unto the Egyptians and
the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.
and all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn
because that the famine was so sore in all lands.
now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt Jacob said
unto his sons why do ye look one upon another?
and he said behold I have heard that there is corn in Egypt
get you down thither and buy for us from thence that we may
live and not die.
and Joseph s Ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.
but Benjamin Joseph s brother Jacob sent not with his
brethren for he said lest peradventure mischief befall him.
and the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came
for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
and Joseph was the Governor over the land and he it was that
sold to all the people of the land and Joseph s brethren
came and bowed down themselves before him with their faces to
the earth.
and Joseph saw his brethren and he knew them but made
himself strange unto them and spake roughly unto them and he
said unto them whence come ye? and they said from the land
of Canaan to buy food.
and Joseph knew his brethren but they knew not him.
and Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them and
said unto them ye are spies to see the nakedness of the land
ye are come.
and they said unto him nay my lord but to buy food are thy
servants come.
we are all one man s sons we are true men thy servants are
no spies.
and he said unto them nay but to see the nakedness of the
land ye are come.
and they said thy servants are twelve brethren the sons of
one man in the land of Canaan and behold the youngest is
this day with our father and one is not.
and Joseph said unto them that is it that I spake unto you
saying ye are spies
hereby ye shall be proved by the life of Pharaoh ye shall not
go forth hence except your youngest brother come hither.
send one of you and let him fetch your brother and ye shall
be kept in prison that your words may be proved whether
there be any truth in you or else by the life of Pharaoh
surely ye are spies.
and he put them all together into ward three days.
and Joseph said unto them the third day this do and live
for I fear God
if ye be true men let one of your brethren be bound in the
house of your prison go ye carry corn for the famine of your
houses
but bring your youngest brother unto me so shall your words
be verified and ye shall not die. and they did so.
and they said one to another we are verily guilty concerning
our brother in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he
besought us and we would not hear therefore is this distress
come upon us.
and Reuben answered them saying spake I not unto you
saying do not Sin against the child and ye would not hear?
therefore behold also his blood is required.
and they knew not that Joseph understood them for he spake
unto them by an interpreter.
and he turned himself about from them and wept and returned
to them again and communed with them and took from them
Simeon and bound him before their eyes.
then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn and to
restore every man s money into his sack and to give them
provision for the way and thus did he unto them.
and they laded their asses with the corn and departed thence.
and as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender
in the inn he espied his money for behold it was in his
sack s mouth.
and he said unto his brethren my money is restored and lo
it is even in my sack and their heart failed them and they
were afraid saying one to another what is this that God hath
done unto us?
and they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan
and told him all that befell unto them saying
the man who is the lord of the land spake roughly to us and
took us for spies of the country.
and we said unto him we are true men we are no spies
we be twelve brethren sons of our father one is not and the
youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.
and the man the lord of the country said unto us hereby
shall I know that ye are true men leave one of your brethren
here with me and take food for the famine of your households
and be gone
and bring your youngest brother unto me then shall I know
that ye are no spies but that ye are true men so will I
deliver you your brother and ye shall traffick in the land.
and it came to pass as they emptied their sacks that behold
every man s bundle of money was in his sack and when both
they and their father saw the bundles of money they were
afraid.
and Jacob their father said unto them me have ye bereaved of
my children Joseph is not and Simeon is not and ye will
take Benjamin away all these things are against me.
and Reuben spake unto his father saying slay my two sons if
I bring him not to thee deliver him into my hand and I will
bring him to thee again.
and he said my son shall not go down with you for his
brother is dead and he is left alone if mischief befall him
by the way in the which ye go then shall ye bring down my
gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
and the famine was sore in the land.
and it came to pass when they had eaten up the corn which
they had brought out of Egypt their father said unto them go
again buy us a little food.
and Judah spake unto him saying the man did solemnly protest
unto us saying ye shall not see my face except your brother
be with you.
if thou wilt send our brother with us we will go down and buy
thee food
but if thou wilt not send him we will not go down for the
man said unto us ye shall not see my face except your
brother be with you.
and Israel said wherefore dealt ye so ill with me as to tell
the man whether ye had yet a brother?
and they said the man asked us straitly of our state and of
our kindred saying is your father yet alive? have ye another
brother? and we told him according to the tenor of these
words could we certainly know that he would say bring your
brother down?
and Judah said unto Israel his father send the lad with me
and we will Arise and go that we may live and not die both
we and thou and also our little ones.
I will be surety for him of my hand shalt thou require him
if I bring him not unto thee and set him before thee then
let me bear the blame for ever
for except we had lingered surely now we had returned this
second time.
and their father Israel said unto them if it must be so now
do this take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels
and carry down the man a present a little balm and a little
honey spices and myrrh nuts and almonds
and take double money in your hand and the money that was
brought again in the mouth of your sacks carry it again in
your hand peradventure it was an oversight
take also your brother and Arise go again unto the man
and God almighty give you mercy before the man that he may
send away your other brother and Benjamin. if I be bereaved
of my children I Am bereaved.
and the men took that present and they took double money in
their hand and Benjamin and rose up and went down to Egypt
and stood before Joseph.
and when Joseph saw Benjamin with them he said to the ruler
of his house bring these men home and slay and make ready
for these men shall dine with me at noon.
and the man did as Joseph bade and the man brought the men
into Joseph s house.
and the men were afraid because they were brought into
Joseph s house and they said because of the money that was
returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in
that he may seek occasion against us and fall upon us and
take us for bondmen and our asses.
and they came near to the steward of Joseph s house and they
communed with him at the door of the house
and said O Sir we came indeed down at the first time to buy
food
and it came to pass when we came to the inn that we opened
our sacks and behold every man s money was in the mouth of
his sack our money in full weight and we have brought it
again in our hand.
and other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food
we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.
and he said peace be to you fear not your God and the God
of your father hath given you treasure in your sacks I had
your money. and he brought Simeon out unto them.
and the man brought the men into Joseph s house and gave them
water and they washed their feet and he gave their asses
provender.
and they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon
for they heard that they should eat bread there.
and when Joseph came home they brought him the present which
was in their hand into the house and bowed themselves to him
to the earth.
and he asked them of their welfare and said is your father
well the old man of whom ye spake? is he yet alive?
and they answered thy servant our father is in good health
he is yet alive. and they bowed down their heads and made
obeisance.
and he lifted up his eyes and saw his brother Benjamin his
mother s son and said is this your younger brother of whom
ye spake unto me? and he said God be gracious unto thee my
son.
and Joseph made haste for his bowels did yearn upon his
brother and he sought where to weep and he entered into his
chamber and wept there.
and he washed his face and went out and refrained himself
and said set on bread.
and they set on for him by himself and for them by
themselves and for the Egyptians which did eat with him by
themselves because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the
Hebrews for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians.
and they sat before him the firstborn according to his
birthright and the youngest according to his youth and the
men marvelled one at another.
and he took and sent messes unto them from before him but
Benjamin s mess was five times so Much as any of their s. and
they drank and were merry with him.
and he commanded the steward of his house saying fill the
men s sacks with food as Much as they can carry and put
every man s money in his sack s mouth.
and put my cup the Silver cup in the sack s mouth of the
youngest and his corn money. and he did according to the word
that Joseph had spoken.
as soon as the morning was light the men were sent away they
and their asses.
and when they were gone out of the city and not yet far off
Joseph said unto his steward up follow after the men and
when thou dost overtake them say unto them wherefore have ye
rewarded evil for good?
is not this it in which my lord drinketh and whereby indeed
he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.
and he overtook them and he spake unto them these same words.
and they said unto him wherefore saith my lord these words?
God forbid that thy servants should do according to this
thing
behold the money which we found in our sacks mouths we
brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan how then
should we steal out of thy lord s house Silver or gold?
with whomsoever of thy servants it be found both let him die
and we also will be my lord s bondmen.
and he said now also let it be according unto your words he
with whom it is found shall be my servant and ye shall be
blameless.
then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground
and opened every man his sack.
and he searched and began at the eldest and left at the
youngest and the cup was found in Benjamin s sack.
then they rent their clothes and laded every man his ass and
returned to the city.
and Judah and his brethren came to Joseph s house for he was
yet there and they fell before him on the ground.
and Joseph said unto them what deed is this that ye have
done? wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?
and Judah said what shall we say unto my lord? what shall we
speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the
iniquity of thy servants behold we are my lord s servants
both we and he also with whom the cup is found.
and he said God forbid that I should do so but the man in
whose hand the cup is found he shall be my servant and as
for you get you up in peace unto your father.
then Judah came near unto him and said oh my lord let thy
servant I pray thee speak a word in my lord s ears and let
not thine anger burn against thy servant for thou art even as
Pharaoh.
my lord asked his servants saying have ye a father or a
brother?
and we said unto my lord we have a father an old man and a
child of his old age a little one and his brother is dead
and he alone is left of his mother and his father loveth him.
and thou saidst unto thy servants bring him down unto me
that I may set mine eyes upon him.
and we said unto my lord the lad cannot leave his father for
if he should leave his father his father would die.
and thou saidst unto thy servants except your youngest
brother come down with you ye shall see my face no more.
and it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my
father we told him the words of my lord.
and our father said go again and buy us a little food.
and we said we cannot go down if our youngest brother be
with us then will we go down for we may not see the man s
face except our youngest brother be with us.
and thy servant my father said unto us ye know that my wife
bare me two sons
and the one went out from me and I said surely he is torn in
pieces and I saw him not since
and if ye take this also from me and mischief befall him ye
shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
now therefore when I come to thy servant my father and the
lad be not with us seeing that his life is bound up in the
lad s life
it shall come to pass when he seeth that the lad is not with
us that he will die and thy servants shall bring down the
gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.
for thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father
saying if I bring him not unto thee then I shall bear the
blame to my father for ever.
now therefore I pray thee let thy servant abide instead of
the lad a bondman to my lord and let the lad go up with his
brethren.
for how shall I go up to my father and the lad be not with
me? lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my
father.
then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that
stood by him and he cried cause every man to go out from me.
and there stood no man with him while Joseph made himself
known unto his brethren.
and he wept aloud and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh
heard.
and Joseph said unto his brethren I Am Joseph doth my father
yet live? and his brethren could not answer him for they were
troubled at his presence.
and Joseph said unto his brethren come near to me I pray
you. and they came near. and he said I Am Joseph your
brother whom ye sold into Egypt.
now therefore be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that
ye sold me hither for God did send me before you to preserve
life.
for these two years hath the famine been in the land and yet
there are five years in the which there shall Neither be
earing nor harvest.
and God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the
earth and to save your lives by a great deliverance.
so now it was not you that sent me hither but God and he
hath made me a father to Pharaoh and lord of all his house
and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.
haste ye and go up to my father and say unto him thus saith
thy son Joseph God hath made me lord of all Egypt come down
unto me tarry not
and thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen and thou shalt be
near unto me thou and thy children and thy children s
children and thy flocks and thy herds and all that thou
hast
and there will I nourish thee for yet there are five years of
famine lest thou and thy household and all that thou hast
come to poverty.
and behold your eyes see and the eyes of my brother
Benjamin that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.
and ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt and of
all that ye have seen and ye shall haste and bring down my
father hither.
and he fell upon his brother Benjamin s neck and wept and
Benjamin wept upon his neck.
moreover he kissed all his brethren and wept upon them and
after that his brethren talked with him.
and the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh s house saying
Joseph s brethren are come and it pleased Pharaoh well and
his servants.
and Pharaoh said unto Joseph say unto thy brethren this do
ye lade your beasts and go get you unto the land of Canaan
and take your father and your households and come unto me
and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt and ye
shall eat the fat of the land.
now thou art commanded this do ye take you wagons out of the
land of Egypt for your little ones and for your wives and
bring your father and come.
also regard not your stuff for the good of all the land of
Egypt is your s.
and the children of Israel did so and Joseph gave them
wagons according to the commandment of Pharaoh and gave them
provision for the way.
to all of them he gave each man changes of raiment but to
Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of Silver and five
changes of raiment.
and to his father he sent after this manner Ten asses laden
with the good things of Egypt and Ten she asses laden with
corn and bread and meat for his father by the way.
so he sent his brethren away and they departed and he said
unto them see that ye fall not out by the way.
and they went up out of Egypt and came into the land of
Canaan unto Jacob their father
and told him saying Joseph is yet alive and he is Governor
over all the land of Egypt. and Jacob s heart fainted for he
believed them not.
and they told him all the words of Joseph which he had said
unto them and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to
carry him the spirit of Jacob their father revived
and Israel said it is enough Joseph my son is yet alive I
will go and see him before I die.
and Israel took his journey with all that he had and came to
Beersheba and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father
Isaac.
and God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night and
said Jacob Jacob. and he said here Am I.
and he said I Am God the God of thy father fear not to go
down into Egypt for I will there make of thee a great nation
I will go down with thee into Egypt and I will also surely
bring thee up again and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine
eyes.
and Jacob rose up from Beersheba and the sons of Israel
carried Jacob their father and their little ones and their
wives in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.
and they took their cattle and their goods which they had
gotten in the land of Canaan and came into Egypt Jacob and
all his seed with him
his sons and his sons sons with him his daughters and his
sons daughters and all his seed brought he with him into
Egypt.
and these are the names of the children of Israel which came
into Egypt Jacob and his sons Reuben Jacob s firstborn.
and the sons of Reuben Hanoch and Phallu and Hezron and
Carmi.
and the sons of Simeon Jemuel and Jamin and Ohad and
Jachin and Zohar and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.
and the sons of Levi Gershon Kohath and Merari.
and the sons of Judah Er and Onan and Shelah and Pharez
and Zarah but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. and the
sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.
and the sons of Issachar Tola and Phuvah and Job and
Shimron.
and the sons of Zebulun Sered and Elon and Jahleel.
these be the sons of Leah which she bare unto Jacob in
Padanaram with his daughter Dinah all the souls of his sons
and his daughters were thirty and three.
and the sons of Gad Ziphion and Haggi Shuni and Ezbon
Eri and Arodi and Areli.
and the sons of Asher Jimnah and Ishuah and Isui and
Beriah and Serah their sister and the sons of Beriah Heber
and Malchiel.
these are the sons of Zilpah whom Laban gave to Leah his
daughter and these she bare unto Jacob even sixteen souls.
the sons of Rachel Jacob s wife Joseph and Benjamin.
and unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and
Ephraim which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of on
bare unto him.
and the sons of Benjamin were Belah and Becher and Ashbel
Gera and Naaman Ehi and Rosh Muppim and Huppim and Ard.
these are the sons of Rachel which were born to Jacob all
the souls were fourteen.
and the sons of Dan Hushim.
and the sons of Naphtali Jahzeel and Guni and Jezer and
Shillem.
these are the sons of Bilhah which Laban gave unto Rachel his
daughter and she bare these unto Jacob all the souls were
seven.
all the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt which came out
of his loins besides Jacob s sons wives all the souls were
threescore and six
and the sons of Joseph which were born him in Egypt were two
souls all the souls of the house of Jacob which came into
Egypt were threescore and Ten.
and he sent Judah before him unto Joseph to direct his face
unto Goshen and they came into the land of Goshen.
and Joseph made ready his chariot and went up to meet Israel
his father to Goshen and presented himself unto him and he
fell on his neck and wept on his neck a good while.
and Israel said unto Joseph now let me die since I have seen
thy face because thou art yet alive.
and Joseph said unto his brethren and unto his father s
house I will go up and shew Pharaoh and say unto him my
brethren and my father s house which were in the land of
Canaan are come unto me
and the men are shepherds for their trade hath been to feed
cattle and they have brought their flocks and their herds
and all that they have.
and it shall come to pass when Pharaoh shall call you and
shall say what is your occupation?
that ye shall say thy servants trade hath been about cattle
from our youth even until now both we and also our fathers
that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen for every Shepherd is
an abomination unto the Egyptians.
then Joseph came and told Pharaoh and said my father and my
brethren and their flocks and their herds and all that they
have are come out of the land of Canaan and behold they
are in the land of Goshen.
and he took some of his brethren even five men and presented
them unto Pharaoh.
and Pharaoh said unto his brethren what is your occupation?
and they said unto Pharaoh thy servants are shepherds both
we and also our fathers.
they said morever unto Pharaoh for to Sojourn in the land are
we come for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks
for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan now therefore
we pray thee let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
and Pharaoh spake unto Joseph saying thy father and thy
brethren are come unto thee
the land of Egypt is before thee in the best of the land make
thy father and brethren to dwell in the land of Goshen let
them dwell and if thou knowest any men of activity among
them then make them rulers over my cattle.
and Joseph brought in Jacob his father and set him before
Pharaoh and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
and Pharaoh said unto Jacob how old art thou?
and Jacob said unto Pharaoh the days of the years of my
pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years few and evil have
the days of the years of my life been and have not attained
unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the
days of their pilgrimage.
and Jacob blessed Pharaoh and went out from before Pharaoh.
and Joseph placed his father and his brethren and gave them a
possession in the land of Egypt in the best of the land in
the land of Rameses as Pharaoh had commanded.
and Joseph nourished his father and his brethren and all his
father s household with bread according to their families.
and there was no bread in all the land for the famine was
very sore so that the land of Egypt and all the land of
Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.
and Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the
land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan for the corn which
they bought and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh s
house.
and when money failed in the land of Egypt and in the land of
Canaan all the Egyptians came unto Joseph and said give us
bread for why should we die in thy presence? for the money
faileth.
and Joseph said give your cattle and I will give you for
your cattle if money fail.
and they brought their cattle unto Joseph and Joseph gave
them bread in exchange for horses and for the flocks and for
the cattle of the herds and for the asses and he fed them
with bread for all their cattle for that year.
when that year was ended they came unto him the second year
and said unto him we will not hide it from my lord how that
our money is spent my lord also hath our herds of cattle
there is not ought left in the sight of my lord but our
bodies and our lands
wherefore shall we die before thine eyes both we and our
land? buy us and our land for bread and we and our land will
be servants unto Pharaoh and give us seed that we may live
and not die that the land be not desolate.
and Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh for the
Egyptians sold every man his field because the famine
prevailed over them so the land became Pharaoh s.
and as for the people he removed them to cities from one end
of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof.
only the land of the priests bought he not for the priests
had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh and did eat their
portion which Pharaoh gave them wherefore they sold not their
lands.
then Joseph said unto the people behold I have bought you
this day and your land for Pharaoh lo here is seed for you
and ye shall sow the land.
and it shall come to pass in the increase that ye shall give
the fifth part unto Pharaoh and four parts shall be your own
for seed of the field and for your food and for them of your
households and for food for your little ones.
and they said thou hast saved our lives let us find grace in
the sight of my lord and we will be Pharaoh s servants.
and Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day
that Pharaoh should have the fifth part except the land of
the priests only which became not Pharaoh s.
and Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt in the country of
Goshen and they had possessions therein and grew and
multiplied exceedingly.
and Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years so the
whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.
and the time drew nigh that Israel must die and he called his
son Joseph and said unto him if now I have found grace in
thy sight put I pray thee thy hand under my thigh and deal
kindly and truly with me bury me not I pray thee in Egypt
but I will lie with my fathers and thou shalt carry me out of
Egypt and bury me in their buryingplace. and he said I will
do as thou hast said.
and he said swear unto me. and he sware unto him. and Israel
bowed himself upon the bed s head.
and it came to pass after these things that one told Joseph
behold thy father is sick and he took with him his two sons
Manasseh and Ephraim.
and one told Jacob and said behold thy son Joseph cometh
unto thee and Israel strengthened himself and sat upon the
bed.
and Jacob said unto Joseph God almighty appeared unto me at
Luz in the land of Canaan and blessed me
and said unto me behold I will make thee fruitful and
multiply thee and I will make of thee a multitude of people
and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an
everlasting possession.
and now thy two sons Ephraim and Manasseh which were born
unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into
Egypt are mine as Reuben and Simeon they shall be mine.
and thy issue which thou begettest after them shall be
thine and shall be called after the name of their brethren in
their inheritance.
and as for me when I came from Padan Rachel died by me in
the land of Canaan in the way when yet there was but a little
way to come unto Ephrath and I buried her there in the way of
Ephrath the same is Bethlehem.
and Israel beheld Joseph s sons and said who are these?
and Joseph said unto his father they are my sons whom God
hath given me in this place. and he said bring them I pray
thee unto me and I will bless them.
now the eyes of Israel were dim for age so that he could not
see. and he brought them near unto him and he kissed them
and embraced them.
and Israel said unto Joseph I had not thought to see thy
face and lo God hath shewed me also thy seed.
and Joseph brought them out from between his knees and he
bowed himself with his face to the earth.
and Joseph took them both Ephraim in his right hand toward
Israel s left hand and Manasseh in his left hand toward
Israel s right hand and brought them near unto him.
and Israel stretched out his right hand and laid it upon
Ephraim s head who was the younger and his left hand upon
Manasseh s head guiding his hands wittingly for Manasseh was
the firstborn.
and he blessed Joseph and said God before whom my fathers
Abraham and Isaac did walk the God which fed me all my life
long unto this day
the angel which redeemed me from all evil bless the lads and
let my name be named on them and the name of my fathers
Abraham and Isaac and let them grow into a multitude in the
midst of the earth.
and when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon
the head of Ephraim it displeased him and he held up his
father s hand to remove it from Ephraim s head unto
Manasseh s head.
and Joseph said unto his father not so my father for this
is the firstborn put thy right hand upon his head.
and his father refused and said I know it my son I know
it he also shall become a people and he also shall be great
but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he and
his seed shall become a multitude of nations.
and he blessed them that day saying in thee shall Israel
bless saying God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh and
he set Ephraim before Manasseh.
and Israel said unto Joseph behold I die but God shall be
with you and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.
moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren
which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and
with my bow.
and Jacob called unto his sons and said gather yourselves
together that I may tell you that which shall befall you in
the last days.
gather yourselves together and hear ye sons of Jacob and
hearken unto Israel your father.
Reuben thou art my firstborn my might and the beginning of
my strength the excellency of dignity and the excellency of
power
unstable as water thou shalt not excel because thou wentest
up to thy father s bed then defiledst thou it he went up to
my couch.
Simeon and Levi are brethren instruments of cruelty are in
their habitations.
O my soul come not thou into their secret unto their
assembly mine honour be not thou united for in their anger
they slew a man and in their selfwill they digged down a
wall.
cursed be their anger for it was fierce and their wrath for
it was cruel I will divide them in Jacob and scatter them in
Israel.
Judah thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise thy hand
shall be in the neck of thine enemies thy father s children
shall bow down before thee.
Judah is a lion s whelp from the prey my son thou art gone
up he stooped down he couched as a lion and as an old lion
who shall rouse him up?
the sceptre shall not depart from Judah nor a lawgiver from
between his feet until Shiloh come and unto him shall the
gathering of the people be.
binding his foal unto the vine and his ass s colt unto the
choice vine he washed his garments in wine and his clothes
in the blood of grapes
his eyes shall be red with wine and his teeth white with
milk.
Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea and he shall be
for an haven of ships and his border shall be unto Zidon.
Issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens
and he saw that rest was good and the land that it was
pleasant and bowed his shoulder to bear and became a servant
unto tribute.
Dan shall judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel.
Dan shall be a serpent by the way an adder in the path that
biteth the horse heels so that his rider shall fall backward.
I have waited for thy salvation O lord.
Gad a troop shall overcome him but he shall overcome at the
last.
out of Asher his bread shall be fat and he shall yield royal
dainties.
Naphtali is a hind let loose he giveth goodly words.
Joseph is a fruitful bough even a fruitful bough by a well
whose branches run over the wall
the archers have sorely grieved him and shot at him and
hated him
but his bow abode in strength and the arms of his hands were
made strong by the hands of the Mighty God of Jacob from
thence is the Shepherd the stone of Israel
even by the God of thy father who shall help thee and by the
almighty who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above
blessings of the deep that lieth under blessings of the
breasts and of the womb
the blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings
of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting
hills they shall be on the head of Joseph and on the crown
of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.
Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf in the morning he shall devour
the prey and at night he shall divide the spoil.
all these are the twelve tribes of Israel and this is it that
their father spake unto them and blessed them every one
according to his blessing he blessed them.
and he charged them and said unto them I Am to be gathered
unto my people bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in
the field of Ephron the Hittite
in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah which is before
Mamre in the land of Canaan which Abraham bought with the
field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a
buryingplace.
there they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife there they
buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife and there I buried Leah.
the purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was
from the children of Heth.
and when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons he
gathered up his feet into the bed and yielded up the ghost
and was gathered unto his people.
and Joseph fell upon his father s face and wept upon him and
kissed him.
and Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his
father and the physicians embalmed Israel.
and forty days were fulfilled for him for so are fulfilled
the days of those which are embalmed and the Egyptians
mourned for him threescore and Ten days.
and when the days of his mourning were past Joseph spake unto
the house of Pharaoh saying if now I have found grace in
your eyes speak I pray you in the ears of Pharaoh saying
my father made me swear saying lo I die in my grave which
I have digged for me in the land of Canaan there shalt thou
bury me. now therefore let me go up I pray thee and bury my
father and I will come again.
and Pharaoh said go up and bury thy father according as he
made thee swear.
and Joseph went up to bury his father and with him went up
all the servants of Pharaoh the elders of his house and all
the elders of the land of Egypt
and all the house of Joseph and his brethren and his
father s house only their little ones and their flocks and
their herds they left in the land of Goshen.
and there went up with him both chariots and horsemen and it
was a very great company.
and they came to the threshingfloor of Atad which is beyond
Jordan and there they mourned with a great and very sore
lamentation and he made a mourning for his father seven days.
and when the inhabitants of the land the Canaanites saw the
mourning in the floor of Atad they said this is a grievous
mourning to the Egyptians wherefore the name of it was called
Abelmizraim which is beyond Jordan.
and his sons did unto him according as he commanded them
for his sons carried him into the land of Canaan and buried
him in the cave of the field of Machpelah which Abraham
bought with the field for a possession of a buryingplace of
Ephron the Hittite before Mamre.
and Joseph returned into Egypt he and his brethren and all
that went up with him to bury his father after he had buried
his father.
and when Joseph s brethren saw that their father was dead
they said Joseph will peradventure hate us and will
certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him.
and they sent a messenger unto Joseph saying thy father did
command before he died saying
so shall ye say unto Joseph forgive I pray thee now the
trespass of thy brethren and their Sin for they did unto
thee evil and now we pray thee forgive the trespass of the
servants of the God of thy father. and Joseph wept when they
spake unto him.
and his brethren also went and fell down before his face and
they said behold we be thy servants.
and Joseph said unto them fear not for Am I in the place of
God?
but as for you ye thought evil against me but God meant it
unto good to bring to pass as it is this day to save Much
people alive.
now therefore fear ye not I will nourish you and your little
ones. and he comforted them and spake kindly unto them.
and Joseph dwelt in Egypt he and his father s house and
Joseph lived an hundred and Ten years.
and Joseph saw Ephraim s children of the third generation the
children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were brought up
upon Joseph s knees.
and Joseph said unto his brethren I die and God will surely
visit you and bring you out of this land unto the land which
he sware to Abraham to Isaac and to Jacob.
and Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel saying God
will surely visit you and ye shall carry up my bones from
hence.
so Joseph died being an hundred and Ten years old and they
embalmed him and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
now these are the names of the children of Israel which came
into Egypt every man and his household came with Jacob.
Reuben Simeon Levi and Judah
Issachar Zebulun and Benjamin
Dan and Naphtali Gad and Asher.
and all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were
seventy souls for Joseph was in Egypt already.
and Joseph died and all his brethren and all that
generation.
and the children of Israel were fruitful and increased
abundantly and multiplied and waxed exceeding Mighty and
the land was filled with them.
now there arose up a new king over Egypt which knew not
Joseph.
and he said unto his people behold the people of the
children of Israel are more and mightier than we
come on let us deal wisely with them lest they multiply and
it come to pass that when there falleth out any war they
join also unto our enemies and fight against us and so get
them up out of the land.
therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them
with their burdens. and they built for Pharaoh treasure
cities Pithom and Raamses.
but the more they afflicted them the more they multiplied and
grew. and they were grieved because of the children of Israel.
and the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with
rigour
and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage in morter
and in brick and in all manner of service in the field all
their service wherein they made them serve was with rigour.
and the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives of which
the name of the one was Shiphrah and the name of the other
Puah
and he said when ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew
women and see them upon the stools if it be a son then ye
shall kill him but if it be a daughter then she shall live.
but the midwives feared God and did not as the king of Egypt
commanded them but saved the men children alive.
and the king of Egypt called for the midwives and said unto
them why have ye done this thing and have saved the men
children alive?
and the midwives said unto Pharaoh because the Hebrew women
are not as the Egyptian women for they are lively and are
delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.
therefore God dealt well with the midwives and the people
multiplied and waxed very Mighty.
and it came to pass because the midwives feared God that he
made them houses.
and Pharaoh charged all his people saying every son that is
born ye shall cast into the river and every daughter ye shall
save alive.
and there went a man of the house of Levi and took to wife a
daughter of Levi.
and the woman conceived and bare a son and when she saw him
that he was a goodly child she hid him three months.
and when she could not longer hide him she took for him an
ark of bulrushes and daubed it with slime and with pitch and
put the child therein and she laid it in the flags by the
river s brink.
and his sister stood afar off to wit what would be done to
him.
and the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the
river and her maidens walked along by the river s side and
when she saw the ark among the flags she sent her maid to
fetch it.
and when she had opened it she saw the child and behold
the babe wept. and she had compassion on him and said this
is one of the Hebrews children.
then said his sister to Pharaoh s daughter shall I go and
call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women that she may nurse
the child for thee?
and Pharaoh s daughter said to her go. and the maid went and
called the child s mother.
and Pharaoh s daughter said unto her take this child away
and nurse it for me and I will give thee thy wages. and the
women took the child and nursed it.
and the child grew and she brought him unto Pharaoh s
daughter and he became her son. and she called his name
Moses and she said because I drew him out of the water.
and it came to pass in those days when Moses was grown that
he went out unto his brethren and looked on their burdens
and he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew one of his
brethren.
and he looked this way and that way and when he saw that
there was no man he slew the Egyptian and hid him in the
sand.
and when he went out the second day behold two men of the
Hebrews strove together and he said to him that did the
wrong wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?
and he said who made thee a prince and a judge over us?
intendest thou to kill me as thou killedst the Egyptian? and
Moses feared and said surely this thing is known.
now when Pharaoh heard this thing he sought to slay Moses.
but Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh and dwelt in the land
of Midian and he sat down by a well.
now the priest of Midian had seven daughters and they came
and drew water and filled the troughs to water their father s
flock.
and the shepherds came and drove them away but Moses stood up
and helped them and watered their flock.
and when they came to Reuel their father he said how is it
that ye are come so soon to day?
and they said an Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the
shepherds and also drew water enough for us and watered the
flock.
and he said unto his daughters and where is he? why is it
that ye have left the man? call him that he may eat bread.
and Moses was content to dwell with the man and he gave Moses
Zipporah his daughter.
and she bare him a son and he called his name Gershom for he
said I have been a stranger in a strange land.
and it came to pass in process of time that the king of Egypt
died and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the
bondage and they cried and their cry came up unto God by
reason of the bondage.
and God heard their groaning and God remembered his covenant
with Abraham with Isaac and with Jacob.
and God looked upon the children of Israel and God had
respect unto them.
now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law the
priest of Midian and he led the flock to the backside of the
desert and came to the mountain of God even to Horeb.
and the angel of the lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire
out of the midst of a bush and he looked and behold the
bush burned with fire and the bush was not consumed.
and Moses said I will now turn aside and see this great
sight why the bush is not burnt.
and when the lord saw that he turned aside to see God called
unto him out of the midst of the bush and said Moses Moses.
and he said here Am I.
and he said draw not nigh hither put off thy shoes from off
thy feet for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.
moreover he said I Am the God of thy father the God of
Abraham the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. and Moses hid
his face for he was afraid to look upon God.
and the lord said I have surely seen the affliction of my
people which are in Egypt and have heard their cry by reason
of their taskmasters for I know their sorrows
and I Am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the
Egyptians and to bring them up out of that land unto a good
land and a large unto a land flowing with milk and honey
unto the place of the Canaanites and the Hittites and the
Amorites and the Perizzites and the Hivites and the
Jebusites.
now therefore behold the cry of the children of Israel is
come unto me and I have also seen the oppression wherewith
the Egyptians oppress them.
come now therefore and I will send thee unto Pharaoh that
thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out
of Egypt.
and Moses said unto God who Am I that I should go unto
Pharaoh and that I should bring forth the children of Israel
out of Egypt?
and he said certainly I will be with thee and this shall be
a token unto thee that I have sent thee when thou hast
brought forth the people out of Egypt ye shall serve God upon
this mountain.
and Moses said unto God behold when I come unto the children
of Israel and shall say unto them the God of your fathers
hath sent me unto you and they shall say to me what is his
name? what shall I say unto them?
and God said unto Moses I Am that I Am and he said thus
shalt thou say unto the children of Israel I Am hath sent me
unto you.
and God said moreover unto Moses thus shalt thou say unto the
children of Israel the lord God of your fathers the God of
Abraham the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob hath sent me
unto you this is my name for ever and this is my memorial
unto all generations.
go and gather the elders of Israel together and say unto
them the lord God of your fathers the God of Abraham of
Isaac and of Jacob appeared unto me saying I have surely
visited you and seen that which is done to you in Egypt
and I have said I will bring you up out of the affliction of
Egypt unto the land of the Canaanites and the Hittites and
the Amorites and the Perizzites and the Hivites and the
Jebusites unto a land flowing with milk and honey.
and they shall hearken to thy voice and thou shalt come thou
and the elders of Israel unto the king of Egypt and ye shall
say unto him the lord God of the Hebrews hath met with us
and now let us go we beseech thee three days journey into
the wilderness that we may sacrifice to the lord our God.
and I Am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go no
not by a Mighty hand.
and I will stretch out my hand and smite Egypt with all my
wonders which I will do in the midst thereof and after that
he will let you go.
and I will give this people favour in the sight of the
Egyptians and it shall come to pass that when ye go ye
shall not go empty.
but every woman shall borrow of her neighbour and of her that
sojourneth in her house jewels of Silver and jewels of gold
and raiment and ye shall put them upon your sons and upon
your daughters and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.
and Moses answered and said but behold they will not
believe me nor hearken unto my voice for they will say the
lord hath not appeared unto thee.
and the lord said unto him what is that in thine hand? and he
said a rod.
and he said cast it on the ground. and he cast it on the
ground and it became a serpent and Moses fled from before
it.
and the lord said unto Moses put forth thine hand and take
it by the tail. and he put forth his hand and caught it and
it became a rod in his hand
that they may believe that the lord God of their fathers the
God of Abraham the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob hath
appeared unto thee.
and the lord said furthermore unto him put now thine hand
into thy bosom. and he put his hand into his bosom and when
he took it out behold his hand was leprous as snow.
and he said put thine hand into thy bosom again. and he put
his hand into his bosom again and plucked it out of his
bosom and behold it was turned again as his other flesh.
and it shall come to pass if they will not believe thee
Neither hearken to the voice of the first sign that they will
believe the voice of the latter sign.
and it shall come to pass if they will not believe also these
two signs Neither hearken unto thy voice that thou shalt
take of the water of the river and pour it upon the dry land
and the water which thou takest out of the river shall become
blood upon the dry land.
and Moses said unto the lord O my lord I Am not eloquent
Neither heretofore nor since thou hast spoken unto thy
servant but I Am slow of speech and of a slow tongue.
and the lord said unto him who hath made man s mouth? or who
maketh the dumb or deaf or the seeing or the blind? have
not I the lord?
now therefore go and I will be with thy mouth and teach thee
what thou shalt say.
and he said O my lord send I pray thee by the hand of him
whom thou wilt send.
and the anger of the lord was kindled against Moses and he
said is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can
speak well. and also behold he cometh forth to meet thee
and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart.
and thou shalt speak unto him and put words in his mouth and
I will be with thy mouth and with his mouth and will teach
you what ye shall do.
and he shall be thy spokesman unto the people and he shall
be even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth and thou
shalt be to him instead of God.
and thou shalt take this rod in thine hand wherewith thou
shalt do signs.
and Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law and
said unto him let me go I pray thee and return unto my
brethren which are in Egypt and see whether they be yet
alive. and Jethro said to Moses go in peace.
and the lord said unto Moses in Midian go return into Egypt
for all the men are dead which sought thy life.
and Moses took his wife and his sons and set them upon an
ass and he returned to the land of Egypt and Moses took the
rod of God in his hand.
and the lord said unto Moses when thou goest to return into
Egypt see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh
which I have put in thine hand but I will harden his heart
that he shall not let the people go.
and thou shalt say unto Pharaoh thus saith the lord Israel
is my son even my firstborn
and I say unto thee let my son go that he may serve me and
if thou refuse to let him go behold I will slay thy son
even thy firstborn.
and it came to pass by the way in the inn that the lord met
him and sought to kill him.
then Zipporah took a Sharp stone and cut off the foreskin of
her son and cast it at his feet and said surely a bloody
husband art thou to me.
so he let him go then she said a bloody husband thou art
because of the circumcision.
and the lord said to Aaron go into the wilderness to meet
Moses. and he went and met him in the mount of God and
kissed him.
and Moses told Aaron all the words of the lord who had sent
him and all the signs which he had commanded him.
and Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders
of the children of Israel
and Aaron spake all the words which the lord had spoken unto
Moses and did the signs in the sight of the people.
and the people believed and when they heard that the lord had
visited the children of Israel and that he had looked upon
their affliction then they bowed their heads and worshipped.
and afterward Moses and Aaron went in and told Pharaoh thus
saith the lord God of Israel let my people go that they may
hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.
and Pharaoh said who is the lord that I should obey his
voice to let Israel go? I know not the lord Neither will I
let Israel go.
and they said the God of the Hebrews hath met with us let us
go we pray thee three days journey into the desert and
sacrifice unto the lord our God lest he fall upon us with
pestilence or with the sword.
and the king of Egypt said unto them wherefore do ye Moses
and Aaron let the people from their works? get you unto your
burdens.
and Pharaoh said behold the people of the land now are many
and ye make them rest from their burdens.
and Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the
people and their officers saying
ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick as
heretofore let them go and gather straw for themselves.
and the tale of the bricks which they did make heretofore ye
shall lay upon them ye shall not diminish ought thereof for
they be idle therefore they cry saying let us go and
sacrifice to our God.
let there more work be laid upon the men that they may labour
therein and let them not regard vain words.
and the taskmasters of the people went out and their
officers and they spake to the people saying thus saith
Pharaoh I will not give you straw.
go ye get you straw where ye can find it yet not ought of
your work shall be diminished.
so the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of
Egypt to gather stubble instead of straw.
and the taskmasters hasted them saying fulfil your works
your daily tasks as when there was straw.
and the officers of the children of Israel which Pharaoh s
taskmasters had set over them were beaten and demanded
wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both
yesterday and to day as heretofore?
then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried
unto Pharaoh saying wherefore dealest thou thus with thy
servants?
there is no straw given unto thy servants and they say to us
make brick and behold thy servants are beaten but the
fault is in thine own people.
but he said ye are idle ye are idle therefore ye say let
us go and do sacrifice to the lord.
go therefore now and work for there shall no straw be given
you yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.
and the officers of the children of Israel did see that they
were in evil case after it was said ye shall not minish
ought from your bricks of your daily task.
and they met Moses and Aaron who stood in the way as they
came forth from Pharaoh
and they said unto them the lord look upon you and judge
because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the eyes of
Pharaoh and in the eyes of his servants to put a sword in
their hand to slay us.
and Moses returned unto the lord and said lord wherefore
hast thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou
hast sent me?
for since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name he hath done
evil to this people Neither hast thou delivered thy people at
all.
then the lord said unto Moses now shalt thou see what I will
do to Pharaoh for with a strong hand shall he let them go
and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.
and God spake unto Moses and said unto him I Am the lord
and I appeared unto Abraham unto Isaac and unto Jacob by
the name of God almighty but by my name Jehovah was I not
known to them.
and I have also established my covenant with them to give
them the land of Canaan the land of their pilgrimage wherein
they were strangers.
and I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel
whom the Egyptians keep in bondage and I have remembered my
covenant.
wherefore say unto the children of Israel I Am the lord and
I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians
and I will rid you out of their bondage and I will redeem you
with a stretched out arm and with great judgments
and I will take you to me for a people and I will be to you a
God and ye shall know that I Am the lord your God which
bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
and I will bring you in unto the land concerning the which I
did swear to give it to Abraham to Isaac and to Jacob and I
will give it you for an heritage I Am the lord.
and Moses spake so unto the children of Israel but they
hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit and for cruel
bondage.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
go in speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt that he let the
children of Israel go out of his land.
and Moses spake before the lord saying behold the children
of Israel have not hearkened unto me how then shall Pharaoh
hear me who Am of uncircumcised lips?
and the lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron and gave them a
charge unto the children of Israel and unto Pharaoh king of
Egypt to bring the children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt.
these be the heads of their fathers houses the sons of
Reuben the firstborn of Israel Hanoch and Pallu Hezron and
Carmi these be the families of Reuben.
and the sons of Simeon Jemuel and Jamin and Ohad and
Jachin and Zohar and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman
these are the families of Simeon.
and these are the names of the sons of Levi according to their
generations Gershon and Kohath and Merari and the years of
the life of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.
the sons of Gershon Libni and Shimi according to their
families.
and the sons of Kohath Amram and Izhar and Hebron and
Uzziel and the years of the life of Kohath were an hundred
thirty and three years.
and the sons of Merari Mahali and Mushi these are the
families of Levi according to their generations.
and Amram took him Jochebed his father s sister to wife and
she bare him Aaron and Moses and the years of the life of
Amram were an hundred and thirty and seven years.
and the sons of Izhar Korah and Nepheg and Zichri.
and the sons of Uzziel Mishael and Elzaphan and Zithri.
and Aaron took him Elisheba daughter of Amminadab sister of
Naashon to wife and she bare him Nadab and Abihu Eleazar
and Ithamar.
and the sons of Korah Assir and Elkanah and Abiasaph these
are the families of the Korhites.
and Eleazar Aaron s son took him one of the daughters of
Putiel to wife and she bare him Phinehas these are the heads
of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
these are that Aaron and Moses to whom the lord said bring
out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to
their armies.
these are they which spake to Pharaoh king of Egypt to bring
out the children of Israel from Egypt these are that Moses
and Aaron.
and it came to pass on the day when the lord spake unto Moses
in the land of Egypt
that the lord spake unto Moses saying I Am the lord speak
thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say unto thee.
and Moses said before the lord behold I Am of uncircumcised
lips and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?
and the lord said unto Moses see I have made thee a God to
Pharaoh and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.
thou shalt speak all that I command thee and Aaron thy
brother shall speak unto Pharaoh that he send the children of
Israel out of his land.
and I will harden Pharaoh s heart and multiply my signs and
my wonders in the land of Egypt.
but Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you that I may lay my hand
upon Egypt and bring forth mine armies and my people the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by great
judgments.
and the Egyptians shall know that I Am the lord when I
stretch forth mine hand upon Egypt and bring out the children
of Israel from among them.
and Moses and Aaron did as the lord commanded them so did
they.
and Moses was fourscore years old and Aaron fourscore and
three years old when they spake unto Pharaoh.
and the lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying
when Pharaoh shall speak unto you saying shew a miracle for
you then thou shalt say unto Aaron take thy rod and cast it
before Pharaoh and it shall become a serpent.
and Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh and they did so as
the lord had commanded and Aaron cast down his rod before
Pharaoh and before his servants and it became a serpent.
then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers now
the magicians of Egypt they also did in like manner with
their enchantments.
for they cast down every man his rod and they became
serpents but Aaron s rod swallowed up their rods.
and he hardened Pharaoh s heart that he hearkened not unto
them as the lord had said.
and the lord said unto Moses Pharaoh s heart is hardened he
refuseth to let the people go.
get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning lo he goeth out unto
the water and thou shalt stand by the river s brink against
he come and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou
take in thine hand.
and thou shalt say unto him the lord God of the Hebrews hath
sent me unto thee saying let my people go that they may
serve me in the wilderness and behold hitherto thou
wouldest not hear.
thus saith the lord in this thou shalt know that I Am the
lord behold I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand
upon the waters which are in the river and they shall be
turned to blood.
and the fish that is in the river shall die and the river
shall stink and the Egyptians shall lothe to drink of the
water of the river.
and the lord spake unto Moses say unto Aaron take thy rod
and stretch out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt upon
their streams upon their rivers and upon their ponds and
upon all their pools of water that they may become blood and
that there may be blood throughout all the land of Egypt both
in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.
and Moses and Aaron did so as the lord commanded and he
lifted up the rod and smote the waters that were in the
river in the sight of Pharaoh and in the sight of his
servants and all the waters that were in the river were
turned to blood.
and the fish that was in the river died and the river stank
and the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river
and there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt.
and the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments and
Pharaoh s heart was hardened Neither did he hearken unto
them as the lord had said.
and Pharaoh turned and went into his house Neither did he set
his heart to this also.
and all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water
to drink for they could not drink of the water of the river.
and seven days were fulfilled after that the lord had smitten
the river.
and the lord spake unto Moses go unto Pharaoh and say unto
him thus saith the lord let my people go that they may
serve me.
and if thou refuse to let them go behold I will smite all
thy borders with frogs
and the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly which shall
go up and come into thine house and into thy bedchamber and
upon thy bed and into the house of thy servants and upon thy
people and into thine ovens and into thy kneadingtroughs
and the frogs shall come up both on thee and upon thy people
and upon all thy servants.
and the lord spake unto Moses say unto Aaron stretch forth
thine hand with thy rod over the streams over the rivers and
over the ponds and cause frogs to come up upon the land of
Egypt.
and Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt and
the frogs came up and covered the land of Egypt.
and the magicians did so with their enchantments and brought
up frogs upon the land of Egypt.
then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron and said intreat the
lord that he may take away the frogs from me and from my
people and I will let the people go that they may do
sacrifice unto the lord.
and Moses said unto Pharaoh glory over me when shall I
intreat for thee and for thy servants and for thy people to
destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses that they may
remain in the river only?
and he said to morrow. and he said be it according to thy
word that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the
lord our God.
and the frogs shall depart from thee and from thy houses and
from thy servants and from thy people they shall remain in
the river only.
and Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh and Moses cried
unto the lord because of the frogs which he had brought
against Pharaoh.
and the lord did according to the word of Moses and the frogs
died out of the houses out of the villages and out of the
fields.
and they gathered them together upon heaps and the land
stank.
but when Pharaoh saw that there was respite he hardened his
heart and hearkened not unto them as the lord had said.
and the lord said unto Moses say unto Aaron stretch out thy
rod and smite the dust of the land that it may become lice
throughout all the land of Egypt.
and they did so for Aaron stretched out his hand with his
rod and smote the dust of the earth and it became lice in
man and in beast all the dust of the land became lice
throughout all the land of Egypt.
and the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring
forth lice but they could not so there were lice upon man
and upon beast.
then the magicians said unto Pharaoh this is the finger of
God and Pharaoh s heart was hardened and he hearkened not
unto them as the lord had said.
and the lord said unto Moses rise up early in the morning
and stand before Pharaoh lo he cometh forth to the water
and say unto him thus saith the lord let my people go that
they may serve me.
else if thou wilt not let my people go behold I will send
swarms of flies upon thee and upon thy servants and upon thy
people and into thy houses and the houses of the Egyptians
shall be full of swarms of flies and also the ground whereon
they are.
and I will sever in that day the land of Goshen in which my
people dwell that no swarms of flies shall be there to the
end thou mayest know that I Am the lord in the midst of the
earth.
and I will put a division between my people and thy people to
morrow shall this sign be.
and the lord did so and there came a grievous swarm of flies
into the house of Pharaoh and into his servants houses and
into all the land of Egypt the land was corrupted by reason
of the swarm of flies.
and Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron and said go ye
sacrifice to your God in the land.
and Moses said it is not meet so to do for we shall
sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the lord our
God lo shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians
before their eyes and will they not stone us?
we will go three days journey into the wilderness and
sacrifice to the lord our God as he shall command us.
and Pharaoh said I will let you go that ye may sacrifice to
the lord your God in the wilderness only ye shall not go very
far away intreat for me.
and Moses said behold I go out from thee and I will intreat
the lord that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh
from his servants and from his people to morrow but let not
Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go
to sacrifice to the lord.
and Moses went out from Pharaoh and intreated the lord.
and the lord did according to the word of Moses and he
removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh from his servants
and from his people there remained not one.
and Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also Neither
would he let the people go.
then the lord said unto Moses go in unto Pharaoh and tell
him thus saith the lord God of the Hebrews let my people go
that they may serve me.
for if thou refuse to let them go and wilt hold them still
behold the hand of the lord is upon thy cattle which is in
the field upon the horses upon the asses upon the camels
upon the oxen and upon the sheep there shall be a very
grievous murrain.
and the lord shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the
cattle of Egypt and there shall nothing die of all that is
the children s of Israel.
and the lord appointed a set time saying to morrow the lord
shall do this thing in the land.
and the lord did that thing on the morrow and all the cattle
of Egypt died but of the cattle of the children of Israel
died not one.
and Pharaoh sent and behold there was not one of the cattle
of the Israelites dead. and the heart of Pharaoh was hardened
and he did not let the people go.
and the lord said unto Moses and unto Aaron take to you
handfuls of ashes of the furnace and let Moses sprinkle it
toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.
and it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt and
shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man and upon
beast throughout all the land of Egypt.
and they took ashes of the furnace and stood before Pharaoh
and Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven and it became a boil
breaking forth with blains upon man and upon beast.
and the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the
boils for the boil was upon the magicians and upon all the
Egyptians.
and the lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh and he hearkened
not unto them as the lord had spoken unto Moses.
and the lord said unto Moses rise up early in the morning
and stand before Pharaoh and say unto him thus saith the
lord God of the Hebrews let my people go that they may serve
me.
for I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart
and upon thy servants and upon thy people that thou mayest
know that there is none like me in all the earth.
for now I will stretch out my hand that I may smite thee and
thy people with pestilence and thou shalt be cut off from the
earth.
and in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up for to
shew in thee my power and that my name may be declared
throughout all the earth.
as yet exaltest thou thyself against my people that thou wilt
not let them go?
behold to morrow about this time I will cause it to rain a
very grievous hail such as hath not been in Egypt since the
foundation thereof even until now.
send therefore now and gather thy cattle and all that thou
hast in the field for upon every man and beast which shall be
found in the field and shall not be brought home the hail
shall come down upon them and they shall die.
he that feared the word of the lord among the servants of
Pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses
and he that regarded not the word of the lord left his
servants and his cattle in the field.
and the lord said unto Moses stretch forth thine hand toward
heaven that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt upon
man and upon beast and upon every herb of the field
throughout the land of Egypt.
and Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven and the lord
sent thunder and hail and the fire ran along upon the ground
and the lord rained hail upon the land of Egypt.
so there was hail and fire mingled with the hail very
grievous such as there was none like it in all the land of
Egypt since it became a nation.
and the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that
was in the field both man and beast and the hail smote every
herb of the field and brake every tree of the field.
only in the land of Goshen where the children of Israel were
was there no hail.
and Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron and said
unto them I have sinned this time the lord is righteous and
I and my people are wicked.
intreat the lord for it is enough that there be no more
Mighty thunderings and hail and I will let you go and ye
shall stay no longer.
and Moses said unto him as soon as I Am gone out of the city
I will spread abroad my hands unto the lord and the thunder
shall cease Neither shall there be any more hail that thou
mayest know how that the earth is the lord s.
but as for thee and thy servants I know that ye will not yet
fear the lord God.
and the flax and the barley was smitten for the barley was in
the ear and the flax was bolled.
but the wheat and the rie were not smitten for they were not
grown up.
and Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh and spread abroad
his hands unto the lord and the thunders and hail ceased and
the rain was not poured upon the earth.
and when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the
thunders were ceased he sinned yet more and hardened his
heart he and his servants.
and the heart of Pharaoh was hardened Neither would he let
the children of Israel go as the lord had spoken by Moses.
and the lord said unto Moses go in unto Pharaoh for I have
hardened his heart and the heart of his servants that I
might shew these my signs before him
and that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son and of thy
son s son what things I have wrought in Egypt and my signs
which I have done among them that ye may know how that I Am
the lord.
and Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh and said unto him
thus saith the lord God of the Hebrews how long wilt thou
refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go that
they may serve me.
else if thou refuse to let my people go behold to morrow
will I bring the locusts into thy coast
and they shall cover the face of the earth that one cannot be
able to see the earth and they shall eat the residue of that
which is escaped which remaineth unto you from the hail and
shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field
and they shall fill thy houses and the houses of all thy
servants and the houses of all the Egyptians which Neither
thy fathers nor thy fathers fathers have seen since the day
that they were upon the earth unto this day. and he turned
himself and went out from Pharaoh.
and Pharaoh s servants said unto him how long shall this man
be a snare unto us? let the men go that they may serve the
lord their God knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?
and Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh and he
said unto them go serve the lord your God but who are they
that shall go?
and Moses said we will go with our young and with our old
with our sons and with our daughters with our flocks and with
our herds will we go for we must hold a feast unto the lord.
and he said unto them let the lord be so with you as I will
let you go and your little ones look to it for evil is
before you.
not so go now ye that are men and serve the lord for that
ye did desire. and they were driven out from Pharaoh s
presence.
and the lord said unto Moses stretch out thine hand over the
land of Egypt for the locusts that they may come up upon the
land of Egypt and eat every herb of the land even all that
the hail hath left.
and Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt and
the lord brought an east wind upon the land all that day and
all that night and when it was morning the east wind brought
the locusts.
and the locust went up over all the land of Egypt and rested
in all the coasts of Egypt very grievous were they before
them there were no such locusts as they Neither after them
shall be such.
for they covered the face of the whole earth so that the land
was darkened and they did eat every herb of the land and all
the fruit of the trees which the hail had left and there
remained not any green thing in the trees or in the herbs of
the field through all the land of Egypt.
then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste and he said
I have sinned against the lord your God and against you.
now therefore forgive I pray thee my Sin only this once and
intreat the lord your God that he may take away from me this
death only.
and he went out from Pharaoh and intreated the lord.
and the lord turned a Mighty strong west wind which took away
the locusts and cast them into the red sea there remained
not one locust in all the coasts of Egypt.
but the lord hardened Pharaoh s heart so that he would not
let the children of Israel go.
and the lord said unto Moses stretch out thine hand toward
heaven that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt
even darkness which may be felt.
and Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven and there
was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days
they saw not one another Neither rose any from his place for
three days but all the children of Israel had light in their
dwellings.
and Pharaoh called unto Moses and said go ye serve the
lord only let your flocks and your herds be stayed let your
little ones also go with you.
and Moses said thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt
offerings that we may sacrifice unto the lord our God.
our cattle also shall go with us there shall not an hoof be
left behind for thereof must we take to serve the lord our
God and we know not with what we must serve the lord until
we come thither.
but the lord hardened Pharaoh s heart and he would not let
them go.
and Pharaoh said unto him get thee from me take heed to
thyself see my face no more for in that day thou seest my
face thou shalt die.
and Moses said thou hast spoken well I will see thy face
again no more.
and the lord said unto Moses yet will I bring one plague more
upon Pharaoh and upon Egypt afterwards he will let you go
hence when he shall let you go he shall surely thrust you
out hence altogether.
speak now in the ears of the people and let every man borrow
of his neighbour and every woman of her neighbour jewels of
Silver and jewels of gold.
and the lord gave the people favour in the sight of the
Egyptians. moreover the man Moses was very great in the land
of Egypt in the sight of Pharaoh s servants and in the sight
of the people.
and Moses said thus saith the lord about midnight will I go
out into the midst of Egypt
and all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die from the
first born of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne even unto
the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the mill and
all the firstborn of beasts.
and there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of
Egypt such as there was none like it nor shall be like it
any more.
but against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move
his tongue against man or beast that ye may know how that
the lord doth put a difference between the Egyptians and
Israel.
and all these thy servants shall come down unto me and bow
down themselves unto me saying get thee out and all the
people that follow thee and after that I will go out. and he
went out from Pharaoh in a great anger.
and the lord said unto Moses Pharaoh shall not hearken unto
you that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.
and Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh and
the lord hardened Pharaoh s heart so that he would not let
the children of Israel go out of his land.
and the lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt
saying
this month shall be unto you the beginning of months it shall
be the first month of the year to you.
speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel saying in the
tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a
lamb according to the house of their fathers a lamb for an
house
and if the household be too little for the lamb let him and
his neighbour next unto his house take it according to the
number of the souls every man according to his eating shall
make your count for the lamb.
your lamb shall be without blemish a Male of the first year
ye shall take it out from the sheep or from the goats
and ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same
month and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel
shall kill it in the evening.
and they shall take of the blood and strike it on the two
side posts and on the upper door post of the houses wherein
they shall eat it.
and they shall eat the flesh in that night roast with fire
and unleavened bread and with bitter herbs they shall eat it.
eat not of it raw nor sodden at all with water but roast
with fire his head with his legs and with the purtenance
thereof.
and ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning and
that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn
with fire.
and thus shall ye eat it with your loins girded your shoes
on your feet and your staff in your hand and ye shall eat it
in haste it is the lord s passover.
for I will pass through the land of Egypt this night and will
smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt both man and
beast and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute
judgment I Am the lord.
and the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses
where ye are and when I see the blood I will pass over you
and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you when I
smite the land of Egypt.
and this day shall be unto you for a memorial and ye shall
keep it a feast to the lord throughout your generations ye
shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.
seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread even the first day
ye shall put away leaven out of your houses for whosoever
eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh
day that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
and in the first day there shall be an holy convocation and
in the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you
no manner of work shall be done in them save that which every
man must eat that only may be done of you.
and ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread for in
this selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land
of Egypt therefore shall ye observe this day in your
generations by an ordinance for ever.
in the first month on the fourteenth day of the month at
even ye shall eat unleavened bread until the one and
twentieth day of the month at even.
seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses for
whosoever eateth that which is leavened even that soul shall
be cut off from the congregation of Israel whether he be a
stranger or born in the land.
ye shall eat nothing leavened in all your habitations shall
ye eat unleavened bread.
then Moses called for all the elders of Israel and said unto
them draw out and take you a lamb according to your families
and kill the passover.
and ye shall take a bunch of hyssop and dip it in the blood
that is in the bason and strike the lintel and the two side
posts with the blood that is in the bason and none of you
shall go out at the door of his house until the morning.
for the lord will pass through to smite the Egyptians and
when he seeth the blood upon the lintel and on the two side
posts the lord will pass over the door and will not suffer
the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.
and ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and
to thy sons for ever.
and it shall come to pass when ye be come to the land which
the lord will give you according as he hath promised that ye
shall keep this service.
and it shall come to pass when your children shall say unto
you what mean ye by this service?
that ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the lord s passover
who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt
when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses. and the
people bowed the head and worshipped.
and the children of Israel went away and did as the lord had
commanded Moses and Aaron so did they.
and it came to pass that at midnight the lord smote all the
firstborn in the land of Egypt from the firstborn of Pharaoh
that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that
was in the dungeon and all the firstborn of cattle.
and Pharaoh rose up in the night he and all his servants
and all the Egyptians and there was a great cry in Egypt for
there was not a house where there was not one dead.
and he called for Moses and Aaron by night and said rise up
and get you forth from among my people both ye and the
children of Israel and go serve the lord as ye have said.
also take your flocks and your herds as ye have said and be
gone and bless me also.
and the Egyptians were urgent upon the people that they might
send them out of the land in haste for they said we be all
dead men.
and the people took their dough before it was leavened their
kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their
shoulders.
and the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses
and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of Silver and
jewels of gold and raiment
and the lord gave the people favour in the sight of the
Egyptians so that they lent unto them such things as they
required. and they spoiled the Egyptians.
and the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth
about six hundred thousand on foot that were men beside
children.
and a mixed multitude went up also with them and flocks and
herds even very Much cattle.
and they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they
brought forth out of Egypt for it was not leavened because
they were thrust out of Egypt and could not tarry Neither
had they prepared for themselves any victual.
now the sojourning of the children of Israel who dwelt in
Egypt was four hundred and thirty years.
and it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years even the selfsame day it came to pass that all the
hosts of the lord went out from the land of Egypt.
it is a night to be Much observed unto the lord for bringing
them out from the land of Egypt this is that night of the
lord to be observed of all the children of Israel in their
generations.
and the lord said unto Moses and Aaron this is the ordinance
of the passover there shall no stranger eat thereof
but every man s servant that is bought for money when thou
hast circumcised him then shall he eat thereof.
a foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.
in one house shall it be eaten thou shalt not carry forth
ought of the flesh abroad out of the house Neither shall ye
break a bone thereof.
all the congregation of Israel shall keep it.
and when a stranger shall Sojourn with thee and will keep the
passover to the lord let all his males be circumcised and
then let him come near and keep it and he shall be as one
that is born in the land for no uncircumcised person shall
eat thereof.
one law shall be to him that is homeborn and unto the
stranger that sojourneth among you.
thus did all the children of Israel as the lord commanded
Moses and Aaron so did they.
and it came to pass the selfsame day that the lord did bring
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their
armies.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
sanctify unto me all the firstborn whatsoever openeth the
womb among the children of Israel both of man and of beast
it is mine.
and Moses said unto the people remember this day in which ye
came out from Egypt out of the house of bondage for by
strength of hand the lord brought you out from this place
there shall no leavened bread be eaten.
this day came ye out in the month Abib.
and it shall be when the lord shall bring thee into the land
of the Canaanites and the Hittites and the Amorites and the
Hivites and the Jebusites which he sware unto thy fathers to
give thee a land flowing with milk and honey that thou shalt
keep this service in this month.
seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread and in the seventh
day shall be a feast to the lord.
unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days and there shall no
leavened bread be seen with thee Neither shall there be
leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters.
and thou shalt shew thy son in that day saying this is done
because of that which the lord did unto me when I came forth
out of Egypt.
and it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand and for
a memorial between thine eyes that the lord s law may be in
thy mouth for with a strong hand hath the lord brought thee
out of Egypt.
thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from
year to year.
and it shall be when the lord shall bring thee into the land
of the Canaanites as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers
and shall give it thee
that thou shalt set apart unto the lord all that openeth the
matrix and every firstling that cometh of a beast which thou
hast the males shall be the lord s.
and every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb
and if thou wilt not redeem it then thou shalt break his
neck and all the firstborn of man among thy children shalt
thou redeem.
and it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come
saying what is this? that thou shalt say unto him by
strength of hand the lord brought us out from Egypt from the
house of bondage
and it came to pass when Pharaoh would hardly let us go that
the lord slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt both the
firstborn of man and the firstborn of beast therefore I
sacrifice to the lord all that openeth the matrix being
males but all the firstborn of my children I redeem.
and it shall be for a token upon thine hand and for frontlets
between thine eyes for by strength of hand the lord brought
us forth out of Egypt.
and it came to pass when Pharaoh had let the people go that
God led them not through the way of the land of the
Philistines although that was near for God said lest
peradventure the people repent when they see war and they
return to Egypt
but God led the people about through the way of the
wilderness of the red sea and the children of Israel went up
harnessed out of the land of Egypt.
and Moses took the bones of Joseph with him for he had
straitly sworn the children of Israel saying God will surely
visit you and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.
and they took their journey from Succoth and encamped in
Etham in the edge of the wilderness.
and the lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud
to lead them the way and by night in a pillar of fire to
give them light to go by day and night
he took not away the pillar of the cloud by day nor the
pillar of fire by night from before the people.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel that they turn and encamp
before Pihahiroth between Migdol and the sea over against
Baalzephon before it shall ye encamp by the sea.
for Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel they are
entangled in the land the wilderness hath shut them in.
and I will harden Pharaoh s heart that he shall follow after
them and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh and upon all his
host that the Egyptians may know that I Am the lord. and they
did so.
and it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled and
the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against
the people and they said why have we done this that we have
let Israel go from serving us?
and he made ready his chariot and took his people with him
and he took six hundred chosen chariots and all the chariots
of Egypt and captains over every one of them.
and the lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt and
he pursued after the children of Israel and the children of
Israel went out with an high hand.
but the Egyptians pursued after them all the horses and
chariots of Pharaoh and his horsemen and his army and
overtook them encamping by the sea beside Pihahiroth before
Baalzephon.
and when Pharaoh drew nigh the children of Israel lifted up
their eyes and behold the Egyptians marched after them and
they were sore afraid and the children of Israel cried out
unto the lord.
and they said unto Moses because there were no graves in
Egypt hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness?
wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us to carry us forth out
of Egypt?
is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt saying
let us alone that we may serve the Egyptians? for it had been
better for us to serve the Egyptians than that we should die
in the wilderness.
and Moses said unto the people fear ye not stand still and
see the salvation of the lord which he will shew to you to
day for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day ye shall see
them again no more for ever.
the lord shall fight for you and ye shall hold your peace.
and the lord said unto Moses wherefore criest thou unto me?
speak unto the children of Israel that they go forward
but lift thou up thy rod and stretch out thine hand over the
sea and divide it and the children of Israel shall go on dry
ground through the midst of the sea.
and I behold I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians and
they shall follow them and I will get me honour upon Pharaoh
and upon all his host upon his chariots and upon his
horsemen.
and the Egyptians shall know that I Am the lord when I have
gotten me honour upon Pharaoh upon his chariots and upon his
horsemen.
and the angel of God which went before the camp of Israel
removed and went behind them and the pillar of the cloud went
from before their face and stood behind them
and it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of
Israel and it was a cloud and darkness to them but it gave
light by night to these so that the one came not near the
other all the night.
and Moses stretched out his hand over the sea and the lord
caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that
night and made the sea dry land and the waters were divided.
and the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon
the dry ground and the waters were a wall unto them on their
right hand and on their left.
and the Egyptians pursued and went in after them to the midst
of the sea even all Pharaoh s horses his chariots and his
horsemen.
and it came to pass that in the morning watch the lord looked
unto the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and
of the cloud and troubled the host of the Egyptians
and took off their chariot wheels that they drave them
heavily so that the Egyptians said let us flee from the face
of Israel for the lord fighteth for them against the
Egyptians.
and the lord said unto Moses stretch out thine hand over the
sea that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians upon
their chariots and upon their horsemen.
and Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea and the sea
returned to his strength when the morning appeared and the
Egyptians fled against it and the lord overthrew the
Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
and the waters returned and covered the chariots and the
horsemen and all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea
after them there remained not so Much as one of them.
but the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst
of the sea and the waters were a wall unto them on their
right hand and on their left.
thus the lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the
Egyptians and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea
shore.
and Israel saw that great work which the lord did upon the
Egyptians and the people feared the lord and believed the
lord and his servant Moses.
then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the
lord and spake saying I will sing unto the lord for he
hath triumphed gloriously the horse and his rider hath he
thrown into the sea.
the lord is my strength and song and he is become my
salvation he is my God and I will prepare him an habitation
my father s God and I will exalt him.
the lord is a man of war the lord is his name.
Pharaoh s chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea his
chosen captains also are drowned in the red sea.
the depths have covered them they sank into the bottom as a
stone.
thy right hand O lord is become glorious in power thy right
hand O lord hath dashed in pieces the enemy.
and in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown
them that rose up against thee thou sentest forth thy wrath
which consumed them as stubble.
and with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered
together the floods stood upright as an heap and the depths
were congealed in the heart of the sea.
the enemy said I will pursue I will overtake I will divide
the spoil my lust shall be satisfied upon them I will draw
my sword my hand shall destroy them.
thou didst blow with thy wind the sea covered them they sank
as lead in the Mighty waters.
who is like unto thee O lord among the gods? who is like
thee glorious in holiness fearful in praises doing wonders?
thou stretchedst out thy right hand the earth swallowed them.
thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast
redeemed thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy
habitation.
the people shall hear and be afraid sorrow shall take hold
on the inhabitants of Palestina.
then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed the Mighty men of
Moab trembling shall take hold upon them all the inhabitants
of Canaan shall melt away.
fear and dread shall fall upon them by the greatness of thine
arm they shall be as still as a stone till thy people pass
over O lord till the people pass over which thou hast
purchased.
thou shalt bring them in and plant them in the mountain of
thine inheritance in the place O lord which thou hast made
for thee to dwell in in the sanctuary O lord which thy
hands have established.
the lord shall reign for ever and ever.
for the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with
his horsemen into the sea and the lord brought again the
waters of the sea upon them but the children of Israel went
on dry land in the midst of the sea.
and Miriam the prophetess the sister of Aaron took a timbrel
in her hand and all the women went out after her with
timbrels and with dances.
and Miriam answered them sing ye to the lord for he hath
triumphed gloriously the horse and his rider hath he thrown
into the sea.
so Moses brought Israel from the red sea and they went out
into the wilderness of Shur and they went three days in the
wilderness and found no water.
and when they came to Marah they could not drink of the
waters of Marah for they were bitter therefore the name of
it was called Marah.
and the people murmured against Moses saying what shall we
drink?
and he cried unto the lord and the lord shewed him a tree
which when he had cast into the waters the waters were made
sweet there he made for them a statute and an ordinance and
there he proved them
and said if thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the
lord thy God and wilt do that which is right in his sight
and wilt give ear to his commandments and keep all his
statutes I will put none of these diseases upon thee which I
have brought upon the Egyptians for I Am the lord that
healeth thee.
and they came to Elim where were twelve wells of water and
threescore and Ten palm trees and they encamped there by the
waters.
and they took their journey from Elim and all the
congregation of the children of Israel came unto the
wilderness of Sin which is between Elim and Sinai on the
fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of
the land of Egypt.
and the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured
against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness
and the children of Israel said unto them would to God we had
died by the hand of the lord in the land of Egypt when we sat
by the flesh pots and when we did eat bread to the full for
ye have brought us forth into this wilderness to kill this
whole assembly with hunger.
then said the lord unto Moses behold I will rain bread from
heaven for you and the people shall go out and gather a
certain rate every day that I may prove them whether they
will walk in my law or no.
and it shall come to pass that on the sixth day they shall
prepare that which they bring in and it shall be twice as
Much as they gather daily.
and Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel at
even then ye shall know that the lord hath brought you out
from the land of Egypt
and in the morning then ye shall see the glory of the lord
for that he heareth your murmurings against the lord and what
are we that ye murmur against us?
and Moses said this shall be when the lord shall give you in
the evening flesh to eat and in the morning bread to the
full for that the lord heareth your murmurings which ye
murmur against him and what are we? your murmurings are not
against us but against the lord.
and Moses spake unto Aaron say unto all the congregation of
the children of Israel come near before the lord for he hath
heard your murmurings.
and it came to pass as Aaron spake unto the whole
congregation of the children of Israel that they looked
toward the wilderness and behold the glory of the lord
appeared in the cloud.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel speak
unto them saying at even ye shall eat flesh and in the
morning ye shall be filled with bread and ye shall know that
I Am the lord your God.
and it came to pass that at even the quails came up and
covered the camp and in the morning the dew lay round about
the host.
and when the dew that lay was gone up behold upon the face
of the wilderness there lay a small round thing as small as
the hoar frost on the ground.
and when the children of Israel saw it they said one to
another it is Manna for they wist not what it was. and Moses
said unto them this is the bread which the lord hath given
you to eat.
this is the thing which the lord hath commanded gather of it
every man according to his eating an omer for every man
according to the number of your persons take ye every man for
them which are in his tents.
and the children of Israel did so and gathered some more
some less.
and when they did mete it with an omer he that gathered Much
had nothing over and he that gathered little had no lack
they gathered every man according to his eating.
and Moses said let no man leave of it till the morning.
notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses but some of
them left of it until the morning and it bred worms and
stank and Moses was wroth with them.
and they gathered it every morning every man according to his
eating and when the sun waxed hot it melted.
and it came to pass that on the sixth day they gathered twice
as Much bread two omers for one man and all the rulers of
the congregation came and told Moses.
and he said unto them this is that which the lord hath said
to morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the lord bake
that which ye will bake to day and seethe that ye will
seethe and that which remaineth over lay up for you to be
kept until the morning.
and they laid it up till the morning as Moses bade and it
did not stink Neither was there any worm therein.
and Moses said eat that to day for to day is a sabbath unto
the lord to day ye shall not find it in the field.
six days ye shall gather it but on the seventh day which is
the sabbath in it there shall be none.
and it came to pass that there went out some of the people on
the seventh day for to gather and they found none.
and the lord said unto Moses how long refuse ye to keep my
commandments and my laws?
see for that the lord hath given you the sabbath therefore
he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two days abide ye
every man in his place let no man go out of his place on the
seventh day.
so the people rested on the seventh day.
and the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna and it
was like coriander seed white and the taste of it was like
wafers made with honey.
and Moses said this is the thing which the lord commandeth
fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations that they
may see the bread wherewith I have fed you in the wilderness
when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
and Moses said unto Aaron take a pot and put an omer full of
Manna therein and lay it up before the lord to be kept for
your generations.
as the lord commanded Moses so Aaron laid it up before the
testimony to be kept.
and the children of Israel did eat Manna forty years until
they came to a land inhabited they did eat Manna until they
came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.
now an omer is the tenth part of an Ephah.
and all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed
from the wilderness of Sin after their journeys according to
the commandment of the lord and pitched in Rephidim and
there was no water for the people to drink.
wherefore the people did chide with Moses and said give us
water that we may drink. and Moses said unto them why chide
ye with me? wherefore do ye tempt the lord?
and the people thirsted there for water and the people
murmured against Moses and said wherefore is this that thou
hast brought us up out of Egypt to kill us and our children
and our cattle with thirst?
and Moses cried unto the lord saying what shall I do unto
this people? they be almost ready to stone me.
and the lord said unto Moses go on before the people and
take with thee of the elders of Israel and thy rod wherewith
thou smotest the river take in thine hand and go.
behold I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb
and thou shalt smite the rock and there shall come water out
of it that the people may drink. and Moses did so in the
sight of the elders of Israel.
and he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah
because of the chiding of the children of Israel and because
they tempted the lord saying is the lord among us or not?
then came Amalek and fought with Israel in Rephidim.
and Moses said unto Joshua choose us out men and go out
fight with Amalek to morrow I will stand on the top of the
hill with the rod of God in mine hand.
so Joshua did as Moses had said to him and fought with
Amalek and Moses Aaron and Hur went up to the top of the
hill.
and it came to pass when Moses held up his hand that Israel
prevailed and when he let down his hand Amalek prevailed.
but Moses hands were heavy and they took a stone and put it
under him and he sat thereon and Aaron and Hur stayed up his
hands the one on the one side and the other on the other
side and his hands were steady until the going down of the
sun.
and Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of
the sword.
and the lord said unto Moses write this for a memorial in a
book and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua for I will
utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.
and Moses built an altar and called the name of it
Jehovahnissi
for he said because the lord hath sworn that the lord will
have war with Amalek from generation to generation.
when Jethro the priest of Midian Moses father in law heard
of all that God had done for Moses and for Israel his people
and that the lord had brought Israel out of Egypt
then Jethro Moses father in law took Zipporah Moses wife
after he had sent her back
and her two sons of which the name of the one was Gershom
for he said I have been an alien in a strange land
and the name of the other was Eliezer for the God of my
father said he was mine help and delivered me from the
sword of Pharaoh
and Jethro Moses father in law came with his sons and his
wife unto Moses into the wilderness where he encamped at the
mount of God
and he said unto Moses I thy father in law Jethro Am come
unto thee and thy wife and her two sons with her.
and Moses went out to meet his father in law and did
obeisance and kissed him and they asked each other of their
welfare and they came into the tent.
and Moses told his father in law all that the lord had done
unto Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel s sake and all
the travail that had come upon them by the way and how the
lord delivered them.
and Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the lord had
done to Israel whom he had delivered out of the hand of the
Egyptians.
and Jethro said blessed be the lord who hath delivered you
out of the hand of the Egyptians and out of the hand of
Pharaoh who hath delivered the people from under the hand of
the Egyptians.
now I know that the lord is greater than all gods for in the
thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.
and Jethro Moses father in law took a burnt offering and
sacrifices for God and Aaron came and all the elders of
Israel to eat bread with Moses father in law before God.
and it came to pass on the morrow that Moses sat to judge the
people and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto
the evening.
and when Moses father in law saw all that he did to the
people he said what is this thing that thou doest to the
people? why sittest thou thyself alone and all the people
stand by thee from morning unto even?
and Moses said unto his father in law because the people come
unto me to enquire of God
when they have a matter they come unto me and I judge
between one and another and I do make them know the statutes
of God and his laws.
and Moses father in law said unto him the thing that thou
doest is not good.
thou wilt surely wear away both thou and this people that is
with thee for this thing is too heavy for thee thou art not
able to perform it thyself alone.
hearken now unto my voice I will give thee counsel and God
shall be with thee be thou for the people to God-ward that
thou mayest bring the causes unto God
and thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws and shalt shew
them the way wherein they must walk and the work that they
must do.
moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men
such as fear God men of truth hating covetousness and place
such over them to be rulers of thousands and rulers of
hundreds rulers of fifties and rulers of tens
and let them judge the people at all seasons and it shall be
that every great matter they shall bring unto thee but every
small matter they shall judge so shall it be easier for
thyself and they shall bear the burden with thee.
if thou shalt do this thing and God command thee so then
thou shalt be able to endure and all this people shall also
go to their place in peace.
so Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law and did
all that he had said.
and Moses chose able men out of all Israel and made them
heads over the people rulers of thousands rulers of
hundreds rulers of fifties and rulers of tens.
and they judged the people at all seasons the hard causes
they brought unto Moses but every small matter they judged
themselves.
and Moses let his father in law depart and he went his way
into his own land.
in the third month when the children of Israel were gone
forth out of the land of Egypt the same day came they into
the wilderness of Sinai.
for they were departed from Rephidim and were come to the
desert of Sinai and had pitched in the wilderness and there
Israel camped before the mount.
and Moses went up unto God and the lord called unto him out
of the mountain saying thus shalt thou say to the house of
Jacob and tell the children of Israel
ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians and how I bare you
on eagles wings and brought you unto myself.
now therefore if ye will obey my voice indeed and keep my
covenant then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above
all people for all the earth is mine
and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests and an holy
nation. these are the words which thou shalt speak unto the
children of Israel.
and Moses came and called for the elders of the people and
laid before their faces all these words which the lord
commanded him.
and all the people answered together and said all that the
lord hath spoken we will do. and Moses returned the words of
the people unto the lord.
and the lord said unto Moses lo I come unto thee in a thick
cloud that the people may hear when I speak with thee and
believe thee for ever. and Moses told the words of the people
unto the lord.
and the lord said unto Moses go unto the people and sanctify
them to day and to morrow and let them wash their clothes
and be ready against the third day for the third day the lord
will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount
Sinai.
and thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about saying
take heed to yourselves that ye go not up into the mount or
touch the border of it whosoever toucheth the mount shall be
surely put to death
there shall not an hand touch it but he shall surely be
stoned or shot through whether it be beast or man it shall
not live when the trumpet soundeth long they shall come up
to the mount.
and Moses went down from the mount unto the people and
sanctified the people and they washed their clothes.
and he said unto the people be ready against the third day
come not at your wives.
and it came to pass on the third day in the morning that
there were thunders and lightnings and a thick cloud upon the
mount and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud so that
all the people that was in the camp trembled.
and Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet
with God and they stood at the nether part of the mount.
and mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke because the lord
descended upon it in fire and the smoke thereof ascended as
the smoke of a furnace and the whole mount quaked greatly.
and when the voice of the trumpet sounded long and waxed
louder and louder Moses spake and God answered him by a
voice.
and the lord came down upon mount Sinai on the top of the
mount and the lord called Moses up to the top of the mount
and Moses went up.
and the lord said unto Moses go down charge the people lest
they break through unto the lord to gaze and many of them
perish.
and let the priests also which come near to the lord
sanctify themselves lest the lord break forth upon them.
and Moses said unto the lord the people cannot come up to
mount Sinai for thou chargedst us saying set bounds about
the mount and sanctify it.
and the lord said unto him away get thee down and thou
shalt come up thou and Aaron with thee but let not the
priests and the people break through to come up unto the lord
lest he break forth upon them.
so Moses went down unto the people and spake unto them.
and God spake all these words saying
I Am the lord thy God which have brought thee out of the land
of Egypt out of the house of bondage.
thou shalt have no other gods before me.
thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image or any
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above or that is in
the earth beneath or that is in the water under the earth.
thou shalt not bow down thyself to them nor serve them for I
the lord thy God Am a jealous God visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me
and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and
keep my commandments.
thou shalt not take the name of the lord thy God in vain for
the lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in
vain.
remember the sabbath day to keep it holy.
six days shalt thou labour and do all thy work
but the seventh day is the sabbath of the lord thy God in it
thou shalt not do any work thou nor thy son nor thy
daughter thy manservant nor thy maidservant nor thy cattle
nor thy stranger that is within thy gates
for in six days the lord made heaven and earth the sea and
all that in them is and rested the seventh day wherefore the
lord blessed the sabbath day and hallowed it.
honour thy father and thy mother that thy days may be long
upon the land which the lord thy God giveth thee.
thou shalt not kill.
thou shalt not commit adultery.
thou shalt not steal.
thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
thou shalt not covet thy neighbour s house thou shalt not
covet thy neighbour s wife nor his manservant nor his
maidservant nor his ox nor his ass nor any thing that is
thy neighbour s.
and all the people saw the thunderings and the lightnings
and the noise of the trumpet and the mountain smoking and
when the people saw it they removed and stood afar off.
and they said unto Moses speak thou with us and we will
hear but let not God speak with us lest we die.
and Moses said unto the people fear not for God is come to
prove you and that his fear may be before your faces that ye
Sin not.
and the people stood afar off and Moses drew near unto the
thick darkness where God was.
and the lord said unto Moses thus thou shalt say unto the
children of Israel ye have seen that I have talked with you
from heaven.
ye shall not make with me gods of Silver Neither shall ye
make unto you gods of gold.
an altar of earth thou shalt make unto me and shalt sacrifice
thereon thy burnt offerings and thy peace offerings thy
sheep and thine oxen in all places where I record my name I
will come unto thee and I will bless thee.
and if thou wilt make me an altar of stone thou shalt not
build it of hewn stone for if thou lift up thy tool upon it
thou hast polluted it.
Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar that thy
nakedness be not discovered thereon.
now these are the judgments which thou shalt set before them.
if thou buy an Hebrew servant six years he shall serve and
in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.
if he came in by himself he shall go out by himself if he
were married then his wife shall go out with him.
if his Master have given him a wife and she have born him
sons or daughters the wife and her children shall be her
Master s and he shall go out by himself.
and if the servant shall plainly say I love my Master my
wife and my children I will not go out free
then his Master shall bring him unto the judges he shall also
bring him to the door or unto the door post and his Master
shall bore his ear through with an aul and he shall serve him
for ever.
and if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant she shall
not go out as the menservants do.
if she please not her Master who hath betrothed her to
himself then shall he let her be redeemed to sell her unto a
strange nation he shall have no power seeing he hath dealt
deceitfully with her.
and if he have betrothed her unto his son he shall deal with
her after the manner of daughters.
if he take him another wife her food her raiment and her
duty of marriage shall he not diminish.
and if he do not these three unto her then shall she go out
free without money.
he that smiteth a man so that he die shall be surely put to
death.
and if a man lie not in wait but God deliver him into his
hand then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.
but if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour to slay
him with guile thou shalt take him from mine altar that he
may die.
and he that smiteth his father or his mother shall be surely
put to death.
and he that stealeth a man and selleth him or if he be found
in his hand he shall surely be put to death.
and he that curseth his father or his mother shall surely be
put to death.
and if men strive together and one smite another with a
stone or with his fist and he die not but keepeth his bed
if he rise again and walk abroad upon his staff then shall
he that smote him be quit only he shall pay for the loss of
his time and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.
and if a man smite his servant or his maid with a rod and
he die under his hand he shall be surely punished.
notwithstanding if he continue a day or two he shall not be
punished for he is his money.
if men strive and hurt a woman with child so that her fruit
depart from her and yet no mischief follow he shall be
surely punished according as the woman s husband will lay
upon him and he shall pay as the judges determine.
and if any mischief follow then thou shalt give life for
life
eye for eye tooth for tooth hand for hand foot for foot
burning for burning wound for wound stripe for stripe.
and if a man smite the eye of his servant or the eye of his
maid that it perish he shall let him go free for his eye s
sake.
and if he smite out his manservant s tooth or his
maidservant s tooth he shall let him go free for his tooth s
sake.
if an ox gore a man or a woman that they die then the ox
shall be surely stoned and his flesh shall not be eaten but
the owner of the ox shall be quit.
but if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past
and it hath been testified to his owner and he hath not kept
him in but that he hath killed a man or a woman the ox shall
be stoned and his owner also shall be put to death.
if there be laid on him a sum of money then he shall give for
the ransom of his life whatsoever is laid upon him.
whether he have gored a son or have gored a daughter
according to this judgment shall it be done unto him.
if the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant he shall
give unto their Master thirty shekels of Silver and the ox
shall be stoned.
and if a man shall open a pit or if a man shall dig a pit
and not cover it and an ox or an ass fall therein
the owner of the pit shall make it good and give money unto
the owner of them and the dead beast shall be his.
and if one man s ox hurt another s that he die then they
shall sell the live ox and divide the money of it and the
dead ox also they shall divide.
or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past
and his owner hath not kept him in he shall surely pay ox for
ox and the dead shall be his own.
if a man shall steal an ox or a sheep and kill it or sell
it he shall restore five oxen for an ox and four sheep for a
sheep.
if a thief be found breaking up and be smitten that he die
there shall no blood be shed for him.
if the sun be risen upon him there shall be blood shed for
him for he should make full restitution if he have nothing
then he shall be sold for his theft.
if the theft be certainly found in his hand alive whether it
be ox or ass or sheep he shall restore double.
if a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten and
shall put in his beast and shall feed in another man s field
of the best of his own field and of the best of his own
vineyard shall he make restitution.
if fire break out and catch in thorns so that the stacks of
corn or the standing corn or the field be consumed
therewith he that kindled the fire shall surely make
restitution.
if a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to
keep and it be stolen out of the man s house if the thief be
found let him pay double.
if the thief be not found then the Master of the house shall
be brought unto the judges to see whether he have put his
hand unto his neighbour s goods.
for all manner of trespass whether it be for ox for ass for
sheep for raiment or for any manner of lost thing which
another challengeth to be his the cause of both parties shall
come before the judges and whom the judges shall condemn he
shall pay double unto his neighbour.
if a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass or an ox or a
sheep or any beast to keep and it die or be hurt or
driven away no man seeing it
then shall an oath of the lord be between them both that he
hath not put his hand unto his neighbour s goods and the
owner of it shall accept thereof and he shall not make it
good.
and if it be stolen from him he shall make restitution unto
the owner thereof.
if it be torn in pieces then let him bring it for witness
and he shall not make good that which was torn.
and if a man borrow ought of his neighbour and it be hurt or
die the owner thereof being not with it he shall surely make
it good.
but if the owner thereof be with it he shall not make it
good if it be an hired thing it came for his hire.
and if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed and lie with
her he shall surely endow her to be his wife.
if her father utterly refuse to give her unto him he shall
pay money according to the dowry of virgins.
thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.
whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death.
he that sacrificeth unto any God save unto the lord only he
shall be utterly destroyed.
thou shalt Neither vex a stranger nor oppress him for ye
were strangers in the land of Egypt.
ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child.
if thou afflict them in any wise and they cry at all unto me
I will surely hear their cry
and my wrath shall wax hot and I will kill you with the
sword and your wives shall be widows and your children
fatherless.
if thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee
thou shalt not be to him as an usurer Neither shalt thou lay
upon him usury.
if thou at all take thy neighbour s raiment to pledge thou
shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down
for that is his covering only it is his raiment for his skin
wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to pass when he
crieth unto me that I will hear for I Am gracious.
thou shalt not revile the gods nor curse the ruler of thy
people.
thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits
and of thy liquors the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give
unto me.
likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen and with thy sheep
seven days it shall be with his dam on the eighth day thou
shalt give it me.
and ye shall be holy men unto me Neither shall ye eat any
flesh that is torn of beasts in the field ye shall cast it to
the dogs.
thou shalt not raise a false report put not thine hand with
the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.
thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil Neither shalt
thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment
Neither shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause.
if thou meet thine enemy s ox or his ass going astray thou
shalt surely bring it back to him again.
if thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his
burden and wouldest forbear to help him thou shalt surely
help with him.
thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.
keep thee far from a false matter and the innocent and
righteous slay thou not for I will not justify the wicked.
and thou shalt take no gift for the gift blindeth the wise
and perverteth the words of the righteous.
also thou shalt not oppress a stranger for ye know the heart
of a stranger seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.
and six years thou shalt sow thy land and shalt gather in the
fruits thereof
but the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still
that the poor of thy people may eat and what they leave the
beasts of the field shall eat. in like manner thou shalt deal
with thy vineyard and with thy oliveyard.
six days thou shalt do thy work and on the seventh day thou
shalt rest that thine ox and thine ass may rest and the son
of thy handmaid and the stranger may be refreshed.
and in all things that I have said unto you be circumspect
and make no mention of the name of other gods Neither let it
be heard out of thy mouth.
three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.
thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread thou shalt eat
unleavened bread seven days as I commanded thee in the time
appointed of the month Abib for in it thou camest out from
Egypt and none shall appear before me empty
and the feast of harvest the firstfruits of thy labours
which thou hast sown in the field and the feast of
ingathering which is in the end of the year when thou hast
gathered in thy labours out of the field.
three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the
lord God.
thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened
bread Neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the
morning.
the first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into
the house of the lord thy God. thou shalt not seethe a kid in
his mother s milk.
behold I send an angel before thee to keep thee in the way
and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.
beware of him and obey his voice provoke him not for he
will not pardon your transgressions for my name is in him.
but if thou shalt indeed obey his voice and do all that I
speak then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies and an
adversary unto thine adversaries.
for mine angel shall go before thee and bring thee in unto
the Amorites and the Hittites and the Perizzites and the
Canaanites the Hivites and the Jebusites and I will cut
them off.
thou shalt not bow down to their gods nor serve them nor do
after their works but thou shalt utterly overthrow them and
quite break down their images.
and ye shall serve the lord your God and he shall bless thy
bread and thy water and I will take sickness away from the
midst of thee.
there shall nothing cast their young nor be barren in thy
land the number of thy days I will fulfil.
I will send my fear before thee and will destroy all the
people to whom thou shalt come and I will make all thine
enemies turn their backs unto thee.
and I will send hornets before thee which shall drive out the
Hivite the Canaanite and the Hittite from before thee.
I will not drive them out from before thee in one year lest
the land become desolate and the beast of the field multiply
against thee.
by little and little I will drive them out from before thee
until thou be increased and inherit the land.
and I will set thy bounds from the red sea even unto the sea
of the Philistines and from the desert unto the river for I
will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand and
thou shalt drive them out before thee.
thou shalt make no covenant with them nor with their gods.
they shall not dwell in thy land lest they make thee Sin
against me for if thou serve their gods it will surely be a
snare unto thee.
and he said unto Moses come up unto the lord thou and
Aaron Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the elders of Israel
and worship ye afar off.
and Moses alone shall come near the lord but they shall not
come nigh Neither shall the people go up with him.
and Moses came and told the people all the words of the lord
and all the judgments and all the people answered with one
voice and said all the words which the lord hath said will
we do.
and Moses wrote all the words of the lord and rose up early
in the morning and builded an altar under the hill and
twelve pillars according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
and he sent young men of the children of Israel which offered
burnt offerings and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto
the lord.
and Moses took half of the blood and put it in basons and
half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.
and he took the book of the covenant and read in the audience
of the people and they said all that the lord hath said will
we do and be obedient.
and Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and
said behold the blood of the covenant which the lord hath
made with you concerning all these words.
then went up Moses and Aaron Nadab and Abihu and seventy
of the elders of Israel
and they saw the God of Israel and there was under his feet
as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone and as it were
the body of heaven in his clearness.
and upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his
hand also they saw God and did eat and drink.
and the lord said unto Moses come up to me into the mount
and be there and I will give thee tables of stone and a law
and commandments which I have written that thou mayest teach
them.
and Moses rose up and his minister Joshua and Moses went up
into the mount of God.
and he said unto the elders tarry ye here for us until we
come again unto you and behold Aaron and Hur are with you
if any man have any matters to do let him come unto them.
and Moses went up into the mount and a cloud covered the
mount.
and the glory of the lord abode upon mount Sinai and the
cloud covered it six days and the seventh day he called unto
Moses out of the midst of the cloud.
and the sight of the glory of the lord was like devouring fire
on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel.
and Moses went into the midst of the cloud and gat him up
into the mount and Moses was in the mount forty days and
forty nights.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel that they bring me an
offering of every man that giveth it willingly with his heart
ye shall take my offering.
and this is the offering which ye shall take of them gold
and Silver and brass
and blue and purple and scarlet and fine linen and goats
hair
and rams skins dyed red and badgers skins and Shittim
wood
oil for the light spices for anointing oil and for sweet
incense
Onyx stones and stones to be set in the Ephod and in the
breastplate.
and let them make me a sanctuary that I may dwell among them.
according to all that I shew thee after the pattern of the
tabernacle and the pattern of all the instruments thereof
even so shall ye make it.
and they shall make an ark of Shittim wood two cubits and a
half shall be the length thereof and a cubit and a half the
breadth thereof and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold within and without
shalt thou overlay it and shalt make upon it a crown of gold
round about.
and thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it and put them in
the four corners thereof and two rings shall be in the one
side of it and two rings in the other side of it.
and thou shalt make staves of Shittim wood and overlay them
with gold.
and thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of
the ark that the ark may be borne with them.
the staves shall be in the rings of the ark they shall not be
taken from it.
and thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall
give thee.
and thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold two cubits and
a half shall be the length thereof and a cubit and a half the
breadth thereof.
and thou shalt make two Cherubims of gold of beaten work
shalt thou make them in the two ends of the mercy seat.
and make one Cherub on the one end and the other Cherub on
the other end even of the mercy seat shall ye make the
Cherubims on the two ends thereof.
and the Cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high
covering the mercy seat with their wings and their faces
shall look one to another toward the mercy seat shall the
faces of the Cherubims be.
and thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark and in
the ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee.
and there I will meet with thee and I will commune with thee
from above the mercy seat from between the two Cherubims
which are upon the ark of the testimony of all things which I
will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel.
thou shalt also make a table of Shittim wood two cubits shall
be the length thereof and a cubit the breadth thereof and a
cubit and a half the height thereof.
and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold and make thereto a
crown of gold round about.
and thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round
about and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border
thereof round about.
and thou shalt make for it four rings of gold and put the
rings in the four corners that are on the four feet thereof.
over against the border shall the rings be for places of the
staves to bear the table.
and thou shalt make the staves of Shittim wood and overlay
them with gold that the table may be borne with them.
and thou shalt make the dishes thereof and spoons thereof
and covers thereof and bowls thereof to cover withal of
pure gold shalt thou make them.
and thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway.
and thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold of beaten work
shall the candlestick be made his shaft and his branches
his bowls his knops and his flowers shall be of the same.
and six branches shall come out of the sides of it three
branches of the candlestick out of the one side and three
branches of the candlestick out of the other side
three bowls made like unto almonds with a knop and a flower
in one branch and three bowls made like almonds in the other
branch with a knop and a flower so in the six branches that
come out of the candlestick.
and in the candlesticks shall be four bowls made like unto
almonds with their knops and their flowers.
and there shall be a knop under two branches of the same and
a knop under two branches of the same and a knop under two
branches of the same according to the six branches that
proceed out of the candlestick.
their knops and their branches shall be of the same all it
shall be one beaten work of pure gold.
and thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof and they shall
light the lamps thereof that they may give light over against
it.
and the tongs thereof and the snuffdishes thereof shall be
of pure gold.
of a talent of pure gold shall he make it with all these
vessels.
and look that thou make them after their pattern which was
shewed thee in the mount.
moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with Ten curtains of
fine twined linen and blue and purple and scarlet with
Cherubims of cunning work shalt thou make them.
the length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits
and the breadth of one curtain four cubits and every one of
the curtains shall have one measure.
the five curtains shall be coupled together one to another
and other five curtains shall be coupled one to another.
and thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one
curtain from the selvedge in the coupling and likewise shalt
thou make in the uttermost edge of another curtain in the
coupling of the second.
fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain and fifty
loops shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in
the coupling of the second that the loops may take hold one
of another.
and thou shalt make fifty taches of gold and couple the
curtains together with the taches and it shall be one
tabernacle.
and thou shalt make curtains of goats hair to be a covering
upon the tabernacle eleven curtains shalt thou make.
the length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits and the
breadth of one curtain four cubits and the eleven curtains
shall be all of one measure.
and thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves and six
curtains by themselves and shalt double the sixth curtain in
the forefront of the tabernacle.
and thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain
that is outmost in the coupling and fifty loops in the edge
of the curtain which coupleth the second.
and thou shalt make fifty taches of brass and put the taches
into the loops and couple the tent together that it may be
one.
and the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent
the half curtain that remaineth shall hang over the backside
of the tabernacle.
and a cubit on the one side and a cubit on the other side of
that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the
tent it shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this
side and on that side to cover it.
and thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams skins
dyed red and a covering above of badgers skins.
and thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of Shittim wood
standing up.
Ten cubits shall be the length of a board and a cubit and a
half shall be the breadth of one board.
two tenons shall there be in one board set in order one
against another thus shalt thou make for all the boards of
the tabernacle.
and thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle twenty
boards on the south side southward.
and thou shalt make forty sockets of Silver under the twenty
boards two sockets under one board for his two tenons and
two sockets under another board for his two tenons.
and for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side
there shall be twenty boards
and their forty sockets of Silver two sockets under one
board and two sockets under another board.
and for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make
six boards.
and two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the
tabernacle in the two sides.
and they shall be coupled together beneath and they shall be
coupled together above the head of it unto one ring thus
shall it be for them both they shall be for the two corners.
and they shall be eight boards and their sockets of Silver
sixteen sockets two sockets under one board and two sockets
under another board.
and thou shalt make bars of Shittim wood five for the boards
of the one side of the tabernacle
and five bars for the boards of the other side of the
tabernacle and five bars for the boards of the side of the
tabernacle for the two sides westward.
and the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from
end to end.
and thou shalt overlay the boards with gold and make their
rings of gold for places for the bars and thou shalt overlay
the bars with gold.
and thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion
thereof which was shewed thee in the mount.
and thou shalt make a vail of blue and purple and scarlet
and fine twined linen of cunning work with Cherubims shall it
be made
and thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of Shittim wood
overlaid with gold their hooks shall be of gold upon the
four sockets of Silver.
and thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches that thou
mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the
testimony and the vail shall divide unto you between the holy
place and the most holy.
and thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the
testimony in the most holy place.
and thou shalt set the table without the vail and the
candlestick over against the table on the side of the
tabernacle toward the south and thou shalt put the table on
the north side.
and thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent of
blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen wrought
with needlework.
and thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars of Shittim
wood and overlay them with gold and their hooks shall be of
gold and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.
and thou shalt make an altar of Shittim wood five cubits
long and five cubits broad the altar shall be foursquare
and the height thereof shall be three cubits.
and thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners
thereof his horns shall be of the same and thou shalt
overlay it with brass.
and thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes and his
shovels and his basons and his fleshhooks and his firepans
all the vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass.
and thou shalt make for it a grate of network of brass and
upon the net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four
corners thereof.
and thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath
that the net may be even to the midst of the altar.
and thou shalt make staves for the altar staves of Shittim
wood and overlay them with brass.
and the staves shall be put into the rings and the staves
shall be upon the two sides of the altar to bear it.
hollow with boards shalt thou make it as it was shewed thee
in the mount so shall they make it.
and thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle for the south
side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine
twined linen of an hundred cubits long for one side
and the twenty pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall
be of brass the hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall
be of Silver.
and likewise for the north side in length there shall be
hangings of an hundred cubits long and his twenty pillars and
their twenty sockets of brass the hooks of the pillars and
their fillets of Silver.
and for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be
hangings of fifty cubits their pillars Ten and their sockets
Ten.
and the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall
be fifty cubits.
the hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits
their pillars three and their sockets three.
and on the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits their
pillars three and their sockets three.
and for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty
cubits of blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined
linen wrought with needlework and their pillars shall be
four and their sockets four.
all the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with
Silver their hooks shall be of Silver and their sockets of
brass.
the length of the court shall be an hundred cubits and the
breadth fifty every where and the height five cubits of fine
twined linen and their sockets of brass.
all the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof
and all the pins thereof and all the pins of the court shall
be of brass.
and thou shalt command the children of Israel that they bring
thee pure oil olive beaten for the light to cause the lamp to
burn always.
in the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail which
is before the testimony Aaron and his sons shall order it
from evening to morning before the lord it shall be a statute
for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children
of Israel.
and take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother and his sons with
him from among the children of Israel that he may minister
unto me in the priest s office even Aaron Nadab and Abihu
Eleazar and Ithamar Aaron s sons.
and thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for
glory and for beauty.
and thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted whom I
have filled with the spirit of wisdom that they may make
Aaron s garments to consecrate him that he may minister unto
me in the priest s office.
and these are the garments which they shall make a
breastplate and an Ephod and a robe and a broidered coat a
mitre and a girdle and they shall make holy garments for
Aaron thy brother and his sons that he may minister unto me
in the priest s office.
and they shall take gold and blue and purple and scarlet
and fine linen.
and they shall make the Ephod of gold of blue and of purple
of scarlet and fine twined linen with cunning work.
it shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two
edges thereof and so it shall be joined together.
and the curious girdle of the Ephod which is upon it shall
be of the same according to the work thereof even of gold
of blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen.
and thou shalt take two Onyx stones and grave on them the
names of the children of Israel
six of their names on one stone and the other six names of
the rest on the other stone according to their birth.
with the work of an engraver in stone like the engravings of
a signet shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of
the children of Israel thou shalt make them to be set in
ouches of gold.
and thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the
Ephod for stones of memorial unto the children of Israel and
Aaron shall bear their names before the lord upon his two
shoulders for a memorial.
and thou shalt make ouches of gold
and two chains of pure gold at the ends of wreathen work
shalt thou make them and fasten the wreathen chains to the
ouches.
and thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning
work after the work of the Ephod thou shalt make it of gold
of blue and of purple and of scarlet and of fine twined
linen shalt thou make it.
foursquare it shall be being doubled a span shall be the
length thereof and a span shall be the breadth thereof.
and thou shalt set in it settings of stones even four rows of
stones the first row shall be a sardius a topaz and a
carbuncle this shall be the first row.
and the second row shall be an emerald a sapphire and a
diamond.
and the third row a ligure an agate and an amethyst.
and the fourth row a beryl and an Onyx and a jasper they
shall be set in gold in their inclosings.
and the stones shall be with the names of the children of
Israel twelve according to their names like the engravings
of a signet every one with his name shall they be according
to the twelve tribes.
and thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of
wreathen work of pure gold.
and thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold
and shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the
breastplate.
and thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two
rings which are on the ends of the breastplate.
and the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt
fasten in the two ouches and put them on the shoulderpieces
of the Ephod before it.
and thou shalt make two rings of gold and thou shalt put them
upon the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof
which is in the side of the Ephod inward.
and two other rings of gold thou shalt make and shalt put
them on the two sides of the Ephod underneath toward the
forepart thereof over against the other coupling thereof
above the curious girdle of the Ephod.
and they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto
the rings of the Ephod with a lace of blue that it may be
above the curious girdle of the Ephod and that the
breastplate be not loosed from the Ephod.
and Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in
the breastplate of judgment upon his heart when he goeth in
unto the holy place for a memorial before the lord
continually.
and thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and
the Thummim and they shall be upon Aaron s heart when he
goeth in before the lord and Aaron shall bear the judgment of
the children of Israel upon his heart before the lord
continually.
and thou shalt make the robe of the Ephod all of blue.
and there shall be an hole in the top of it in the midst
thereof it shall have a binding of woven work round about the
hole of it as it were the hole of an habergeon that it be
not rent.
and beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of
blue and of purple and of scarlet round about the hem
thereof and bells of gold between them round about
a golden bell and a pomegranate a golden bell and a
pomegranate upon the hem of the robe round about.
and it shall be upon Aaron to minister and his sound shall be
heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the lord
and when he cometh out that he die not.
and thou shalt make a plate of pure gold and grave upon it
like the engravings of a signet holiness to the lord.
and thou shalt put it on a blue lace that it may be upon the
mitre upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.
and it shall be upon Aaron s forehead that Aaron may bear the
iniquity of the holy things which the children of Israel
shall hallow in all their holy gifts and it shall be always
upon his forehead that they may be accepted before the lord.
and thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen and thou
shalt make the mitre of fine linen and thou shalt make the
girdle of needlework.
and for Aaron s sons thou shalt make coats and thou shalt
make for them girdles and bonnets shalt thou make for them
for glory and for beauty.
and thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother and his sons
with him and shalt anoint them and consecrate them and
sanctify them that they may minister unto me in the priest s
office.
and thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their
nakedness from the loins even unto the thighs they shall
reach
and they shall be upon Aaron and upon his sons when they
come in unto the tabernacle of the congregation or when they
come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place that
they bear not iniquity and die it shall be a statute for
ever unto him and his seed after him.
and this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow
them to minister unto me in the priest s office take one
young bullock and two rams without blemish
and unleavened bread and cakes unleavened tempered with oil
and wafers unleavened anointed with oil of wheaten flour
shalt thou make them.
and thou shalt put them into one basket and bring them in the
basket with the bullock and the two rams.
and Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation and shalt wash them with
water.
and thou shalt take the garments and put upon Aaron the coat
and the robe of the Ephod and the Ephod and the breastplate
and gird him with the curious girdle of the Ephod
and thou shalt put the mitre upon his head and put the holy
crown upon the mitre.
then shalt thou take the anointing oil and pour it upon his
head and anoint him.
and thou shalt bring his sons and put coats upon them.
and thou shalt gird them with girdles Aaron and his sons and
put the bonnets on them and the priest s office shall be
theirs for a perpetual statute and thou shalt consecrate
Aaron and his sons.
and thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the
tabernacle of the congregation and Aaron and his sons shall
put their hands upon the head of the bullock.
and thou shalt kill the bullock before the lord by the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation.
and thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock and put it
upon the horns of the altar with thy finger and pour all the
blood beside the bottom of the altar.
and thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards and
the caul that is above the liver and the two kidneys and the
fat that is upon them and burn them upon the altar.
but the flesh of the bullock and his skin and his dung
shalt thou burn with fire without the camp it is a Sin
offering.
thou shalt also take one Ram and Aaron and his sons shall put
their hands upon the head of the Ram.
and thou shalt slay the Ram and thou shalt take his blood
and sprinkle it round about upon the altar.
and thou shalt cut the Ram in pieces and wash the inwards of
him and his legs and put them unto his pieces and unto his
head.
and thou shalt burn the whole Ram upon the altar it is a
burnt offering unto the lord it is a sweet savour an
offering made by fire unto the lord.
and thou shalt take the other Ram and Aaron and his sons
shall put their hands upon the head of the Ram.
then shalt thou kill the Ram and take of his blood and put
it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron and upon the tip of
the right ear of his sons and upon the thumb of their right
hand and upon the great toe of their right foot and sprinkle
the blood upon the altar round about.
and thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar and
of the anointing oil and sprinkle it upon Aaron and upon his
garments and upon his sons and upon the garments of his sons
with him and he shall be hallowed and his garments and his
sons and his sons garments with him.
also thou shalt take of the Ram the fat and the rump and the
fat that covereth the inwards and the caul above the liver
and the two kidneys and the fat that is upon them and the
right shoulder for it is a Ram of consecration
and one loaf of bread and one cake of oiled bread and one
wafer out of the basket of the unleavened bread that is before
the lord
and thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron and in the hands
of his sons and shalt wave them for a wave offering before
the lord.
and thou shalt receive them of their hands and burn them upon
the altar for a burnt offering for a sweet savour before the
lord it is an offering made by fire unto the lord.
and thou shalt take the breast of the Ram of Aaron s
consecration and wave it for a wave offering before the lord
and it shall be thy part.
and thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering and
the shoulder of the heave offering which is waved and which
is heaved up of the Ram of the consecration even of that
which is for Aaron and of that which is for his sons
and it shall be Aaron s and his sons by a statute for ever
from the children of Israel for it is an heave offering and
it shall be an heave offering from the children of Israel of
the sacrifice of their peace offerings even their heave
offering unto the lord.
and the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons after him
to be anointed therein and to be consecrated in them.
and that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on
seven days when he cometh into the tabernacle of the
congregation to minister in the holy place.
and thou shalt take the Ram of the consecration and seethe
his flesh in the holy place.
and Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the Ram and the
bread that is in the basket by the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation.
and they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was
made to consecrate and to sanctify them but a stranger shall
not eat thereof because they are holy.
and if ought of the flesh of the consecrations or of the
bread remain unto the morning then thou shalt burn the
remainder with fire it shall not be eaten because it is
holy.
and thus shalt thou do unto Aaron and to his sons according
to all things which I have commanded thee seven days shalt
thou consecrate them.
and thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a Sin offering
for atonement and thou shalt cleanse the altar when thou
hast made an atonement for it and thou shalt anoint it to
sanctify it.
seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar and
sanctify it and it shall be an altar most holy whatsoever
toucheth the altar shall be holy.
now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar two
lambs of the first year day by day continually.
the one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning and the other
lamb thou shalt offer at even
and with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the
fourth part of an hin of beaten oil and the fourth part of an
hin of wine for a drink offering.
and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even and shalt do
thereto according to the meat offering of the morning and
according to the drink offering thereof for a sweet savour
an offering made by fire unto the lord.
this shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your
generations at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation
before the lord where I will meet you to speak there unto
thee.
and there I will meet with the children of Israel and the
tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.
and I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation and
the altar I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons to
minister to me in the priest s office.
and I will dwell among the children of Israel and will be
their God.
and they shall know that I Am the lord their God that brought
them forth out of the land of Egypt that I may dwell among
them I Am the lord their God.
and thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon of Shittim
wood shalt thou make it.
a cubit shall be the length thereof and a cubit the breadth
thereof foursquare shall it be and two cubits shall be the
height thereof the horns thereof shall be of the same.
and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold the top thereof and
the sides thereof round about and the horns thereof and thou
shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.
and two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of
it by the two corners thereof upon the two sides of it shalt
thou make it and they shall be for places for the staves to
bear it withal.
and thou shalt make the staves of Shittim wood and overlay
them with gold.
and thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of
the testimony before the mercy seat that is over the
testimony where I will meet with thee.
and Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning when
he dresseth the lamps he shall burn incense upon it.
and when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even he shall burn
incense upon it a perpetual incense before the lord
throughout your generations.
ye shall offer no strange incense thereon nor burnt
sacrifice nor meat offering Neither shall ye pour drink
offering thereon.
and Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in
a year with the blood of the Sin offering of atonements once
in the year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your
generations it is most holy unto the lord.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
when thou takest the sum of the children of Israel after their
number then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul
unto the lord when thou numberest them that there be no
plague among them when thou numberest them.
this they shall give every one that passeth among them that
are numbered half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary
 a shekel is twenty gerahs an half shekel shall be the
offering of the lord.
every one that passeth among them that are numbered from
twenty years old and above shall give an offering unto the
lord.
the rich shall not give more and the poor shall not give less
than half a shekel when they give an offering unto the lord
to make an atonement for your souls.
and thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of
Israel and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle
of the congregation that it may be a memorial unto the
children of Israel before the lord to make an atonement for
your souls.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
thou shalt also make a laver of brass and his foot also of
brass to wash withal and thou shalt put it between the
tabernacle of the congregation and the altar and thou shalt
put water therein.
for Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet
thereat
when they go into the tabernacle of the congregation they
shall wash with water that they die not or when they come
near to the altar to minister to burn offering made by fire
unto the lord
so they shall wash their hands and their feet that they die
not and it shall be a statute for ever to them even to him
and to his seed throughout their generations.
moreover the lord spake unto Moses saying
take thou also unto thee principal spices of pure myrrh five
hundred shekels and of sweet cinnamon half so Much even two
hundred and fifty shekels and of sweet calamus two hundred
and fifty shekels
and of cassia five hundred shekels after the shekel of the
sanctuary and of oil olive an hin
and thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment an ointment
compound after the art of the apothecary it shall be an holy
anointing oil.
and thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation
therewith and the ark of the testimony
and the table and all his vessels and the candlestick and his
vessels and the altar of incense
and the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels and the
laver and his foot.
and thou shalt sanctify them that they may be most holy
whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.
and thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons and consecrate them
that they may minister unto me in the priest s office.
and thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel saying this
shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your
generations.
upon man s flesh shall it not be poured Neither shall ye make
any other like it after the composition of it it is holy
and it shall be holy unto you.
whosoever compoundeth any like it or whosoever putteth any of
it upon a stranger shall even be cut off from his people.
and the lord said unto Moses take unto thee sweet spices
stacte and onycha and galbanum these sweet spices with pure
frankincense of each shall there be a like weight
and thou shalt make it a perfume a confection after the art
of the apothecary tempered together pure and holy
and thou shalt beat some of it very small and put of it
before the testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation
where I will meet with thee it shall be unto you most holy.
and as for the perfume which thou shalt make ye shall not
make to yourselves according to the composition thereof it
shall be unto thee holy for the lord.
whosoever shall make like unto that to smell thereto shall
even be cut off from his people.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
see I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri the son of
Hur of the tribe of Judah
and I have filled him with the spirit of God in wisdom and
in understanding and in knowledge and in all manner of
workmanship
to devise cunning works to work in gold and in Silver and
in brass
and in cutting of stones to set them and in carving of
timber to work in all manner of workmanship.
and I behold I have given with him Aholiab the son of
Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan and in the hearts of all that
are wise hearted I have put wisdom that they may make all
that I have commanded thee
the tabernacle of the congregation and the ark of the
testimony and the mercy seat that is thereupon and all the
furniture of the tabernacle
and the table and his furniture and the pure candlestick with
all his furniture and the altar of incense
and the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture and
the laver and his foot
and the cloths of service and the holy garments for Aaron the
priest and the garments of his sons to minister in the
priest s office
and the anointing oil and sweet incense for the holy place
according to all that I have commanded thee shall they do.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak thou also unto the children of Israel saying verily my
sabbaths ye shall keep for it is a sign between me and you
throughout your generations that ye may know that I Am the
lord that doth sanctify you.
ye shall keep the sabbath therefore for it is holy unto you
every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death for
whosoever doeth any work therein that soul shall be cut off
from among his people.
six days may work be done but in the seventh is the sabbath
of rest holy to the lord whosoever doeth any work in the
sabbath day he shall surely be put to death.
wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath to
observe the sabbath throughout their generations for a
perpetual covenant.
it is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever
for in six days the lord made heaven and earth and on the
seventh day he rested and was refreshed.
and he gave unto Moses when he had made an end of communing
with him upon mount Sinai two tables of testimony tables of
stone written with the finger of God.
and when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of
the mount the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron
and said unto him up make us gods which shall go before us
for as for this Moses the man that brought us up out of the
land of Egypt we wot not what is become of him.
and Aaron said unto them break off the golden earrings which
are in the ears of your wives of your sons and of your
daughters and bring them unto me.
and all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in
their ears and brought them unto Aaron.
and he received them at their hand and fashioned it with a
graving tool after he had made it a molten calf and they
said these be thy gods O Israel which brought thee up out
of the land of Egypt.
and when Aaron saw it he built an altar before it and Aaron
made proclamation and said to morrow is a feast to the lord.
and they rose up early on the morrow and offered burnt
offerings and brought peace offerings and the people sat
down to eat and to drink and rose up to play.
and the lord said unto Moses go get thee down for thy
people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have
corrupted themselves
they have turned aside quickly out of the way which I
commanded them they have made them a molten calf and have
worshipped it and have sacrificed thereunto and said these
be thy gods O Israel which have brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt.
and the lord said unto Moses I have seen this people and
behold it is a stiffnecked people
now therefore let me alone that my wrath may wax hot against
them and that I may consume them and I will make of thee a
great nation.
and Moses besought the lord his God and said lord why doth
thy wrath wax hot against thy people which thou hast brought
forth out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a
Mighty hand?
wherefore should the Egyptians speak and say for mischief
did he bring them out to slay them in the mountains and to
consume them from the face of the earth? turn from thy fierce
wrath and repent of this evil against thy people.
remember Abraham Isaac and Israel thy servants to whom
thou swarest by thine own self and saidst unto them I will
multiply your seed as the stars of heaven and all this land
that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed and they
shall inherit it for ever.
and the lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto
his people.
and Moses turned and went down from the mount and the two
tables of the testimony were in his hand the tables were
written on both their sides on the one side and on the other
were they written.
and the tables were the work of God and the writing was the
writing of God graven upon the tables.
and when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted
he said unto Moses there is a noise of war in the camp.
and he said it is not the voice of them that shout for
mastery Neither is it the voice of them that cry for being
overcome but the noise of them that sing do I hear.
and it came to pass as soon as he came nigh unto the camp
that he saw the calf and the dancing and Moses anger waxed
hot and he cast the tables out of his hands and brake them
beneath the mount.
and he took the calf which they had made and burnt it in the
fire and ground it to powder and strawed it upon the water
and made the children of Israel drink of it.
and Moses said unto Aaron what did this people unto thee
that thou hast brought so great a Sin upon them?
and Aaron said let not the anger of my lord wax hot thou
knowest the people that they are set on mischief.
for they said unto me make us gods which shall go before us
for as for this Moses the man that brought us up out of the
land of Egypt we wot not what is become of him.
and I said unto them whosoever hath any gold let them break
it off. so they gave it me then I cast it into the fire and
there came out this calf.
and when Moses saw that the people were naked for Aaron had
made them naked unto their shame among their enemies
then Moses stood in the gate of the camp and said who is on
the lord s side? let him come unto me. and all the sons of
Levi gathered themselves together unto him.
and he said unto them thus saith the lord God of Israel put
every man his sword by his side and go in and out from gate
to gate throughout the camp and slay every man his brother
and every man his companion and every man his neighbour.
and the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses
and there fell of the people that day about three thousand
men.
for Moses had said consecrate yourselves today to the lord
even every man upon his son and upon his brother that he may
bestow upon you a blessing this day.
and it came to pass on the morrow that Moses said unto the
people ye have sinned a great Sin and now I will go up unto
the lord peradventure I shall make an atonement for your Sin.
and Moses returned unto the lord and said oh this people
have sinned a great Sin and have made them gods of gold.
yet now if thou wilt forgive their sin-- and if not blot
me I pray thee out of thy book which thou hast written.
and the lord said unto Moses whosoever hath sinned against
me him will I blot out of my book.
therefore now go lead the people unto the place of which I
have spoken unto thee behold mine angel shall go before
thee nevertheless in the day when I visit I will visit their
Sin upon them.
and the lord plagued the people because they made the calf
which Aaron made.
and the lord said unto Moses depart and go up hence thou
and the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of
Egypt unto the land which I sware unto Abraham to Isaac and
to Jacob saying unto thy seed will I give it
and I will send an angel before thee and I will drive out the
Canaanite the Amorite and the Hittite and the Perizzite
the Hivite and the Jebusite
unto a land flowing with milk and honey for I will not go up
in the midst of thee for thou art a stiffnecked people lest
I consume thee in the way.
and when the people heard these evil tidings they mourned
and no man did put on him his ornaments.
for the lord had said unto Moses say unto the children of
Israel ye are a stiffnecked people I will come up into the
midst of thee in a moment and consume thee therefore now put
off thy ornaments from thee that I may know what to do unto
thee.
and the children of Israel stripped themselves of their
ornaments by the mount Horeb.
and Moses took the tabernacle and pitched it without the
camp afar off from the camp and called it the tabernacle of
the congregation. and it came to pass that every one which
sought the lord went out unto the tabernacle of the
congregation which was without the camp.
and it came to pass when Moses went out unto the tabernacle
that all the people rose up and stood every man at his tent
door and looked after Moses until he was gone into the
tabernacle.
and it came to pass as Moses entered into the tabernacle the
cloudy pillar descended and stood at the door of the
tabernacle and the lord talked with Moses.
and all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the
tabernacle door and all the people rose up and worshipped
every man in his tent door.
and the lord spake unto Moses face to face as a man speaketh
unto his friend. and he turned again into the camp but his
servant Joshua the son of Nun a young man departed not out
of the tabernacle.
and Moses said unto the lord see thou sayest unto me bring
up this people and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt
send with me. yet thou hast said I know thee by name and
thou hast also found grace in my sight.
now therefore I pray thee if I have found grace in thy
sight shew me now thy way that I may know thee that I may
find grace in thy sight and consider that this nation is thy
people.
and he said my presence shall go with thee and I will give
thee rest.
and he said unto him if thy presence go not with me carry us
not up hence.
for wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have
found grace in thy sight? is it not in that thou goest with
us? so shall we be separated I and thy people from all the
people that are upon the face of the earth.
and the lord said unto Moses I will do this thing also that
thou hast spoken for thou hast found grace in my sight and I
know thee by name.
and he said I beseech thee shew me thy glory.
and he said I will make all my goodness pass before thee and
I will proclaim the name of the lord before thee and will be
gracious to whom I will be gracious and will shew mercy on
whom I will shew mercy.
and he said thou canst not see my face for there shall no
man see me and live.
and the lord said behold there is a place by me and thou
shalt stand upon a rock
and it shall come to pass while my glory passeth by that I
will put thee in a clift of the rock and will cover thee with
my hand while I pass by
and I will take away mine hand and thou shalt see my back
parts but my face shall not be seen.
and the lord said unto Moses Hew thee two tables of stone
like unto the first and I will write upon these tables the
words that were in the first tables which thou brakest.
and be ready in the morning and come up in the morning unto
mount Sinai and present thyself there to me in the top of the
mount.
and no man shall come up with thee Neither let any man be
seen throughout all the mount Neither let the flocks nor
herds feed before that mount.
and he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first and
Moses rose up early in the morning and went up unto mount
Sinai as the lord had commanded him and took in his hand the
two tables of stone.
and the lord descended in the cloud and stood with him there
and proclaimed the name of the lord.
and the lord passed by before him and proclaimed the lord
the lord God merciful and gracious longsuffering and
abundant in goodness and truth
keeping mercy for thousands forgiving iniquity and
transgression and Sin and that will by no means clear the
guilty visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children and upon the children s children unto the third and
to the fourth generation.
and Moses made haste and bowed his head toward the earth and
worshipped.
and he said if now I have found grace in thy sight O lord
let my lord I pray thee go among us for it is a stiffnecked
people and pardon our iniquity and our Sin and take us for
thine inheritance.
and he said behold I make a covenant before all thy people
I will do marvels such as have not been done in all the
earth nor in any nation and all the people among which thou
art shall see the work of the lord for it is a terrible thing
that I will do with thee.
observe thou that which I command thee this day behold I
drive out before thee the Amorite and the Canaanite and the
Hittite and the Perizzite and the Hivite and the Jebusite.
take heed to thyself lest thou make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land whither thou goest lest it be for a
snare in the midst of thee
but ye shall destroy their altars break their images and cut
down their groves
for thou shalt worship no other God for the lord whose name
is jealous is a jealous God
lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land
and they go a whoring after their gods and do sacrifice unto
their gods and one call thee and thou eat of his sacrifice
and thou take of their daughters unto thy sons and their
daughters go a whoring after their gods and make thy sons go
a whoring after their gods.
thou shalt make thee no molten gods.
the feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. seven days thou
shalt eat unleavened bread as I commanded thee in the time
of the month Abib for in the month Abib thou camest out from
Egypt.
all that openeth the matrix is mine and every firstling among
thy cattle whether ox or sheep that is Male.
but the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb and
if thou redeem him not then shalt thou break his neck. all
the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem. and none shall
appear before me empty.
six days thou shalt work but on the seventh day thou shalt
rest in earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.
and thou shalt observe the feast of weeks of the firstfruits
of wheat harvest and the feast of ingathering at the year s
end.
thrice in the year shall all your menchildren appear before
the lord God the God of Israel.
for I will cast out the nations before thee and enlarge thy
borders Neither shall any man desire thy land when thou
shalt go up to appear before the lord thy God thrice in the
year.
thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven
Neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be
left unto the morning.
the first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto
the house of the lord thy God. thou shalt not seethe a kid in
his mother s milk.
and the lord said unto Moses write thou these words for
after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with
thee and with Israel.
and he was there with the lord forty days and forty nights he
did Neither eat bread nor drink water. and he wrote upon the
tables the words of the covenant the Ten commandments.
and it came to pass when Moses came down from mount Sinai
with the two tables of testimony in Moses hand when he came
down from the mount that Moses wist not that the skin of his
face shone while he talked with him.
and when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses
behold the skin of his face shone and they were afraid to
come nigh him.
and Moses called unto them and Aaron and all the rulers of
the congregation returned unto him and Moses talked with
them.
and afterward all the children of Israel came nigh and he
gave them in commandment all that the lord had spoken with him
in mount Sinai.
and till Moses had done speaking with them he put a vail on
his face.
but when Moses went in before the lord to speak with him he
took the vail off until he came out. and he came out and
spake unto the children of Israel that which he was commanded.
and the children of Israel saw the face of Moses that the
skin of Moses face shone and Moses put the vail upon his
face again until he went in to speak with him.
and Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of
Israel together and said unto them these are the words which
the lord hath commanded that ye should do them.
six days shall work be done but on the seventh day there
shall be to you an holy day a sabbath of rest to the lord
whosoever doeth work therein shall be put to death.
ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the
sabbath day.
and Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of
Israel saying this is the thing which the lord commanded
saying
take ye from among you an offering unto the lord whosoever is
of a willing heart let him bring it an offering of the lord
gold and Silver and brass
and blue and purple and scarlet and fine linen and goats
hair
and rams skins dyed red and badgers skins and Shittim
wood
and oil for the light and spices for anointing oil and for
the sweet incense
and Onyx stones and stones to be set for the Ephod and for
the breastplate.
and every wise hearted among you shall come and make all that
the lord hath commanded
the tabernacle his tent and his covering his taches and
his boards his bars his pillars and his sockets
the ark and the staves thereof with the mercy seat and the
vail of the covering
the table and his staves and all his vessels and the
shewbread
the candlestick also for the light and his furniture and his
lamps with the oil for the light
and the incense altar and his staves and the anointing oil
and the sweet incense and the hanging for the door at the
entering in of the tabernacle
the altar of burnt offering with his brasen grate his
staves and all his vessels the laver and his foot
the hangings of the court his pillars and their sockets and
the hanging for the door of the court
the pins of the tabernacle and the pins of the court and
their cords
the cloths of service to do service in the holy place the
holy garments for Aaron the priest and the garments of his
sons to minister in the priest s office.
and all the congregation of the children of Israel departed
from the presence of Moses.
and they came every one whose heart stirred him up and every
one whom his spirit made willing and they brought the lord s
offering to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation
and for all his service and for the holy garments.
and they came both men and women as many as were willing
hearted and brought bracelets and earrings and rings and
tablets all jewels of gold and every man that offered
offered an offering of gold unto the lord.
and every man with whom was found blue and purple and
scarlet and fine linen and goats hair and red skins of
rams and badgers skins brought them.
every one that did offer an offering of Silver and brass
brought the lord s offering and every man with whom was
found Shittim wood for any work of the service brought it.
and all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their
hands and brought that which they had spun both of blue and
of purple and of scarlet and of fine linen.
and all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun
goats hair.
and the rulers brought Onyx stones and stones to be set for
the Ephod and for the breastplate
and spice and oil for the light and for the anointing oil
and for the sweet incense.
the children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the
lord every man and woman whose heart made them willing to
bring for all manner of work which the lord had commanded to
be made by the hand of Moses.
and Moses said unto the children of Israel see the lord hath
called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri the son of Hur of the
tribe of Judah
and he hath filled him with the spirit of God in wisdom in
understanding and in knowledge and in all manner of
workmanship
and to devise curious works to work in gold and in Silver
and in brass
and in the cutting of stones to set them and in carving of
wood to make any manner of cunning work.
and he hath put in his heart that he may teach both he and
Aholiab the son of Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan.
them hath he filled with wisdom of heart to work all manner
of work of the engraver and of the cunning workman and of
the embroiderer in blue and in purple in scarlet and in
fine linen and of the weaver even of them that do any work
and of those that devise cunning work.
then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab and every wise hearted man
in whom the lord put wisdom and understanding to know how to
work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary
according to all that the lord had commanded.
and Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab and every wise hearted
man in whose heart the lord had put wisdom even every one
whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it
and they received of Moses all the offering which the
children of Israel had brought for the work of the service of
the sanctuary to make it withal. and they brought yet unto
him free offerings every morning.
and all the wise men that wrought all the work of the
sanctuary came every man from his work which they made
and they spake unto Moses saying the people bring Much more
than enough for the service of the work which the lord
commanded to make.
and Moses gave commandment and they caused it to be
proclaimed throughout the camp saying let Neither man nor
woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary. so
the people were restrained from bringing.
for the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make
it and too Much.
and every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of
the tabernacle made Ten curtains of fine twined linen and
blue and purple and scarlet with Cherubims of cunning work
made he them.
the length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits and the
breadth of one curtain four cubits the curtains were all of
one size.
and he coupled the five curtains one unto another and the
other five curtains he coupled one unto another.
and he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the
selvedge in the coupling likewise he made in the uttermost
side of another curtain in the coupling of the second.
fifty loops made he in one curtain and fifty loops made he in
the edge of the curtain which was in the coupling of the
second the loops held one curtain to another.
and he made fifty taches of gold and coupled the curtains one
unto another with the taches so it became one tabernacle.
and he made curtains of goats hair for the tent over the
tabernacle eleven curtains he made them.
the length of one curtain was thirty cubits and four cubits
was the breadth of one curtain the eleven curtains were of
one size.
and he coupled five curtains by themselves and six curtains
by themselves.
and he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain
in the coupling and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the
curtain which coupleth the second.
and he made fifty taches of brass to couple the tent together
that it might be one.
and he made a covering for the tent of rams skins dyed red
and a covering of badgers skins above that.
and he made boards for the tabernacle of Shittim wood
standing up.
the length of a board was Ten cubits and the breadth of a
board one cubit and a half.
one board had two tenons equally distant one from another
thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
and he made boards for the tabernacle twenty boards for the
south side southward
and forty sockets of Silver he made under the twenty boards
two sockets under one board for his two tenons and two
sockets under another board for his two tenons.
and for the other side of the tabernacle which is toward the
north corner he made twenty boards
and their forty sockets of Silver two sockets under one
board and two sockets under another board.
and for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six
boards.
and two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in
the two sides.
and they were coupled beneath and coupled together at the
head thereof to one ring thus he did to both of them in both
the corners.
and there were eight boards and their sockets were sixteen
sockets of Silver under every board two sockets.
and he made bars of Shittim wood five for the boards of the
one side of the tabernacle
and five bars for the boards of the other side of the
tabernacle and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for
the sides westward.
and he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from
the one end to the other.
and he overlaid the boards with gold and made their rings of
gold to be places for the bars and overlaid the bars with
gold.
and he made a vail of blue and purple and scarlet and fine
twined linen with Cherubims made he it of cunning work.
and he made thereunto four pillars of Shittim wood and
overlaid them with gold their hooks were of gold and he cast
for them four sockets of Silver.
and he made an hanging for the tabernacle door of blue and
purple and scarlet and fine twined linen of needlework
and the five pillars of it with their hooks and he overlaid
their chapiters and their fillets with gold but their five
sockets were of brass.
and Bezaleel made the ark of Shittim wood two cubits and a
half was the length of it and a cubit and a half the breadth
of it and a cubit and a half the height of it
and he overlaid it with pure gold within and without and made
a crown of gold to it round about.
and he cast for it four rings of gold to be set by the four
corners of it even two rings upon the one side of it and two
rings upon the other side of it.
and he made staves of Shittim wood and overlaid them with
gold.
and he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark
to bear the ark.
and he made the mercy seat of pure gold two cubits and a half
was the length thereof and one cubit and a half the breadth
thereof.
and he made two Cherubims of gold beaten out of one piece
made he them on the two ends of the mercy seat
one Cherub on the end on this side and another Cherub on the
other end on that side out of the mercy seat made he the
Cherubims on the two ends thereof.
and the Cherubims spread out their wings on high and covered
with their wings over the mercy seat with their faces one to
another even to the mercy seatward were the faces of the
Cherubims.
and he made the table of Shittim wood two cubits was the
length thereof and a cubit the breadth thereof and a cubit
and a half the height thereof
and he overlaid it with pure gold and made thereunto a crown
of gold round about.
also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about
and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about.
and he cast for it four rings of gold and put the rings upon
the four corners that were in the four feet thereof.
over against the border were the rings the places for the
staves to bear the table.
and he made the staves of Shittim wood and overlaid them with
gold to bear the table.
and he made the vessels which were upon the table his dishes
and his spoons and his bowls and his covers to cover withal
of pure gold.
and he made the candlestick of pure gold of beaten work made
he the candlestick his shaft and his branch his bowls his
knops and his flowers were of the same
and six branches going out of the sides thereof three
branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof and
three branches of the candlestick out of the other side
thereof
three bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one branch a
knop and a flower and three bowls made like almonds in
another branch a knop and a flower so throughout the six
branches going out of the candlestick.
and in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds his
knops and his flowers
and a knop under two branches of the same and a knop under
two branches of the same and a knop under two branches of the
same according to the six branches going out of it.
their knops and their branches were of the same all of it was
one beaten work of pure gold.
and he made his seven lamps and his snuffers and his
snuffdishes of pure gold.
of a talent of pure gold made he it and all the vessels
thereof.
and he made the incense altar of Shittim wood the length of
it was a cubit and the breadth of it a cubit it was
foursquare and two cubits was the height of it the horns
thereof were of the same.
and he overlaid it with pure gold both the top of it and the
sides thereof round about and the horns of it also he made
unto it a crown of gold round about.
and he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof
by the two corners of it upon the two sides thereof to be
places for the staves to bear it withal.
and he made the staves of Shittim wood and overlaid them with
gold.
and he made the holy anointing oil and the pure incense of
sweet spices according to the work of the apothecary.
and he made the altar of burnt offering of Shittim wood five
cubits was the length thereof and five cubits the breadth
thereof it was foursquare and three cubits the height
thereof.
and he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it the
horns thereof were of the same and he overlaid it with brass.
and he made all the vessels of the altar the pots and the
shovels and the basons and the fleshhooks and the firepans
all the vessels thereof made he of brass.
and he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the
compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it.
and he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of
brass to be places for the staves.
and he made the staves of Shittim wood and overlaid them with
brass.
and he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the
altar to bear it withal he made the altar hollow with
boards.
and he made the laver of brass and the foot of it of brass
of the lookingglasses of the women assembling which assembled
at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
and he made the court on the south side southward the
hangings of the court were of fine twined linen an hundred
cubits
their pillars were twenty and their brasen sockets twenty
the hooks of the pillars and their fillets were of Silver.
and for the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits
their pillars were twenty and their sockets of brass twenty
the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of Silver.
and for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits their
pillars Ten and their sockets Ten the hooks of the pillars
and their fillets of Silver.
and for the east side eastward fifty cubits.
the hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits
their pillars three and their sockets three.
and for the other side of the court gate on this hand and
that hand were hangings of fifteen cubits their pillars
three and their sockets three.
all the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined
linen.
and the sockets for the pillars were of brass the hooks of
the pillars and their fillets of Silver and the overlaying of
their chapiters of Silver and all the pillars of the court
were filleted with Silver.
and the hanging for the gate of the court was needlework of
blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen and
twenty cubits was the length and the height in the breadth
was five cubits answerable to the hangings of the court.
and their pillars were four and their sockets of brass four
their hooks of Silver and the overlaying of their chapiters
and their fillets of Silver.
and all the pins of the tabernacle and of the court round
about were of brass.
this is the sum of the tabernacle even of the tabernacle of
testimony as it was counted according to the commandment of
Moses for the service of the Levites by the hand of Ithamar
son to Aaron the priest.
and Bezaleel the son Uri the son of Hur of the tribe of
Judah made all that the lord commanded Moses.
and with him was Aholiab son of Ahisamach of the tribe of
Dan an engraver and a cunning workman and an embroiderer in
blue and in purple and in scarlet and fine linen.
all the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of
the holy place even the gold of the offering was twenty and
nine talents and seven hundred and thirty shekels after the
shekel of the sanctuary.
and the Silver of them that were numbered of the congregation
was an hundred talents and a thousand seven hundred and
threescore and fifteen shekels after the shekel of the
sanctuary
a bekah for every man that is half a shekel after the
shekel of the sanctuary for every one that went to be
numbered from twenty years old and upward for six hundred
thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.
and of the hundred talents of Silver were cast the sockets of
the sanctuary and the sockets of the vail an hundred sockets
of the hundred talents a talent for a socket.
and of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he
made hooks for the pillars and overlaid their chapiters and
filleted them.
and the brass of the offering was seventy talents and two
thousand and four hundred shekels.
and therewith he made the sockets to the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation and the brasen altar and the
brasen grate for it and all the vessels of the altar
and the sockets of the court round about and the sockets of
the court gate and all the pins of the tabernacle and all
the pins of the court round about.
and of the blue and purple and scarlet they made cloths of
service to do service in the holy place and made the holy
garments for Aaron as the lord commanded Moses.
and he made the Ephod of gold blue and purple and scarlet
and fine twined linen.
and they did beat the gold into thin plates and cut it into
wires to work it in the blue and in the purple and in the
scarlet and in the fine linen with cunning work.
they made shoulderpieces for it to couple it together by the
two edges was it coupled together.
and the curious girdle of his Ephod that was upon it was of
the same according to the work thereof of gold blue and
purple and scarlet and fine twined linen as the lord
commanded Moses.
and they wrought Onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold
graven as signets are graven with the names of the children
of Israel.
and he put them on the shoulders of the Ephod that they
should be stones for a memorial to the children of Israel as
the lord commanded Moses.
and he made the breastplate of cunning work like the work of
the Ephod of gold blue and purple and scarlet and fine
twined linen.
it was foursquare they made the breastplate double a span
was the length thereof and a span the breadth thereof being
doubled.
and they set in it four rows of stones the first row was a
sardius a topaz and a carbuncle this was the first row.
and the second row an emerald a sapphire and a diamond.
and the third row a ligure an agate and an amethyst.
and the fourth row a beryl an Onyx and a jasper they were
inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings.
and the stones were according to the names of the children of
Israel twelve according to their names like the engravings
of a signet every one with his name according to the twelve
tribes.
and they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends of
wreathen work of pure gold.
and they made two ouches of gold and two gold rings and put
the two rings in the two ends of the breastplate.
and they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings
on the ends of the breastplate.
and the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in
the two ouches and put them on the shoulderpieces of the
Ephod before it.
and they made two rings of gold and put them on the two ends
of the breastplate upon the border of it which was on the
side of the Ephod inward.
and they made two other golden rings and put them on the two
sides of the Ephod underneath toward the forepart of it over
against the other coupling thereof above the curious girdle
of the Ephod.
and they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings
of the Ephod with a lace of blue that it might be above the
curious girdle of the Ephod and that the breastplate might
not be loosed from the Ephod as the lord commanded Moses.
and he made the robe of the Ephod of woven work all of blue.
and there was an hole in the midst of the robe as the hole of
an habergeon with a band round about the hole that it should
not rend.
and they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue
and purple and scarlet and twined linen.
and they made bells of pure gold and put the bells between
the pomegranates upon the hem of the robe round about between
the pomegranates
a bell and a pomegranate a bell and a pomegranate round
about the hem of the robe to minister in as the lord
commanded Moses.
and they made coats of fine linen of woven work for Aaron and
for his sons
and a mitre of fine linen and goodly bonnets of fine linen
and linen breeches of fine twined linen
and a girdle of fine twined linen and blue and purple and
scarlet of needlework as the lord commanded Moses.
and they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold and
wrote upon it a writing like to the engravings of a signet
holiness to the lord.
and they tied unto it a lace of blue to fasten it on high
upon the mitre as the lord commanded Moses.
thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation finished and the children of Israel did
according to all that the lord commanded Moses so did they.
and they brought the tabernacle unto Moses the tent and all
his furniture his taches his boards his bars and his
pillars and his sockets
and the covering of rams skins dyed red and the covering of
badgers skins and the vail of the covering
the ark of the testimony and the staves thereof and the
mercy seat
the table and all the vessels thereof and the shewbread
the pure candlestick with the lamps thereof even with the
lamps to be set in order and all the vessels thereof and the
oil for light
and the golden altar and the anointing oil and the sweet
incense and the hanging for the tabernacle door
the brasen altar and his grate of brass his staves and all
his vessels the laver and his foot
the hangings of the court his pillars and his sockets and
the hanging for the court gate his cords and his pins and
all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle for the tent
of the congregation
the cloths of service to do service in the holy place and the
holy garments for Aaron the priest and his sons garments to
minister in the priest s office.
according to all that the lord commanded Moses so the
children of Israel made all the work.
and Moses did look upon all the work and behold they had
done it as the lord had commanded even so had they done it
and Moses blessed them.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
on the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the
tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.
and thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony and cover
the ark with the vail.
and thou shalt bring in the table and set in order the things
that are to be set in order upon it and thou shalt bring in
the candlestick and light the lamps thereof.
and thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before
the ark of the testimony and put the hanging of the door to
the tabernacle.
and thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the
door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.
and thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the
congregation and the altar and shalt put water therein.
and thou shalt set up the court round about and hang up the
hanging at the court gate.
and thou shalt take the anointing oil and anoint the
tabernacle and all that is therein and shalt hallow it and
all the vessels thereof and it shall be holy.
and thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering and all
his vessels and sanctify the altar and it shall be an altar
most holy.
and thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot and sanctify it.
and thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation and wash them with water.
and thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments and anoint
him and sanctify him that he may minister unto me in the
priest s office.
and thou shalt bring his sons and clothe them with coats
and thou shalt anoint them as thou didst anoint their father
that they may minister unto me in the priest s office for
their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood
throughout their generations.
thus did Moses according to all that the lord commanded him
so did he.
and it came to pass in the first month in the second year on
the first day of the month that the tabernacle was reared up.
and Moses reared up the tabernacle and fastened his sockets
and set up the boards thereof and put in the bars thereof
and reared up his pillars.
and he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle and put the
covering of the tent above upon it as the lord commanded
Moses.
and he took and put the testimony into the ark and set the
staves on the ark and put the mercy seat above upon the ark
and he brought the ark into the tabernacle and set up the
vail of the covering and covered the ark of the testimony as
the lord commanded Moses.
and he put the table in the tent of the congregation upon the
side of the tabernacle northward without the vail.
and he set the bread in order upon it before the lord as the
lord had commanded Moses.
and he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation
over against the table on the side of the tabernacle
southward.
and he lighted the lamps before the lord as the lord
commanded Moses.
and he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation
before the vail
and he burnt sweet incense thereon as the lord commanded
Moses.
and he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle.
and he put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the
tabernacle of the tent of the congregation and offered upon
it the burnt offering and the meat offering as the lord
commanded Moses.
and he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and
the altar and put water there to wash withal.
and Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their
feet thereat
when they went into the tent of the congregation and when
they came near unto the altar they washed as the lord
commanded Moses.
and he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the
altar and set up the hanging of the court gate. so Moses
finished the work.
then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation and the
glory of the lord filled the tabernacle.
and Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the
congregation because the cloud abode thereon and the glory
of the lord filled the tabernacle.
and when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle the
children of Israel went onward in all their journeys
but if the cloud were not taken up then they journeyed not
till the day that it was taken up.
for the cloud of the lord was upon the tabernacle by day and
fire was on it by night in the sight of all the house of
Israel throughout all their journeys.
and the lord called unto Moses and spake unto him out of the
tabernacle of the congregation saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them if any
man of you bring an offering unto the lord ye shall bring
your offering of the cattle even of the herd and of the
flock.
if his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd let him
offer a Male without blemish he shall offer it of his own
voluntary will at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation before the lord.
and he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering
and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.
and he shall kill the bullock before the lord and the
priests Aaron s sons shall bring the blood and sprinkle the
blood round about upon the altar that is by the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.
and he shall flay the burnt offering and cut it into his
pieces.
and the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the
altar and lay the wood in order upon the fire
and the priests Aaron s sons shall lay the parts the head
and the fat in order upon the wood that is on the fire which
is upon the altar
but his inwards and his legs shall he wash in water and the
priest shall burn all on the altar to be a burnt sacrifice
an offering made by fire of a sweet savour unto the lord.
and if his offering be of the flocks namely of the sheep or
of the goats for a burnt sacrifice he shall bring it a Male
without blemish.
and he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before
the lord and the priests Aaron s sons shall sprinkle his
blood round about upon the altar.
and he shall cut it into his pieces with his head and his
fat and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that
is on the fire which is upon the altar
but he shall wash the inwards and the legs with water and the
priest shall bring it all and burn it upon the altar it is a
burnt sacrifice an offering made by fire of a sweet savour
unto the lord.
and if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the lord be of
fowls then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves or of
young pigeons.
and the priest shall bring it unto the altar and wring off
his head and burn it on the altar and the blood thereof
shall be wrung out at the side of the altar
and he shall pluck away his crop with his feathers and cast
it beside the altar on the east part by the place of the
ashes
and he shall cleave it with the wings thereof but shall not
divide it asunder and the priest shall burn it upon the
altar upon the wood that is upon the fire it is a burnt
sacrifice an offering made by fire of a sweet savour unto
the lord.
and when any will offer a meat offering unto the lord his
offering shall be of fine flour and he shall pour oil upon
it and put frankincense thereon
and he shall bring it to Aaron s sons the priests and he
shall take thereout his handful of the flour thereof and of
the oil thereof with all the frankincense thereof and the
priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar to be an
offering made by fire of a sweet savour unto the lord
and the remnant of the meat offering shall be Aaron s and his
sons it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the lord
made by fire.
and if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the
oven it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with
oil or unleavened wafers anointed with oil.
and if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in a pan it
shall be of fine flour unleavened mingled with oil.
thou shalt part it in pieces and pour oil thereon it is a
meat offering.
and if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in the fryingpan
it shall be made of fine flour with oil.
and thou shalt bring the meat offering that is made of these
things unto the lord and when it is presented unto the
priest he shall bring it unto the altar.
and the priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial
thereof and shall burn it upon the altar it is an offering
made by fire of a sweet savour unto the lord.
and that which is left of the meat offering shall be Aaron s
and his sons it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the
lord made by fire.
no meat offering which ye shall bring unto the lord shall be
made with leaven for ye shall burn no leaven nor any honey
in any offering of the lord made by fire.
as for the oblation of the firstfruits ye shall offer them
unto the lord but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a
sweet savour.
and every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with
salt Neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of
thy God to be lacking from thy meat offering with all thine
offerings thou shalt offer salt.
and if thou offer a meat offering of thy firstfruits unto the
lord thou shalt offer for the meat offering of thy
firstfruits green ears of corn dried by the fire even corn
beaten out of full ears.
and thou shalt put oil upon it and lay frankincense thereon
it is a meat offering.
and the priest shall burn the memorial of it part of the
beaten corn thereof and part of the oil thereof with all the
frankincense thereof it is an offering made by fire unto the
lord.
and if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering if he
offer it of the herd whether it be a Male or female he shall
offer it without blemish before the lord.
and he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering and
kill it at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation and
Aaron s sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the
altar round about.
and he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an
offering made by fire unto the lord the fat that covereth the
inwards and all the fat that is upon the inwards
and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them which is by
the flanks and the caul above the liver with the kidneys it
shall he take away.
and Aaron s sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt
sacrifice which is upon the wood that is on the fire it is
an offering made by fire of a sweet savour unto the lord.
and if his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering unto the
lord be of the flock Male or female he shall offer it
without blemish.
if he offer a lamb for his offering then shall he offer it
before the lord.
and he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering and
kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation and Aaron s
sons shall sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the
altar.
and he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an
offering made by fire unto the lord the fat thereof and the
whole rump it shall he take off hard by the backbone and the
fat that covereth the inwards and all the fat that is upon
the inwards
and the two kidneys and the fat that is upon them which is
by the flanks and the caul above the liver with the kidneys
it shall he take away.
and the priest shall burn it upon the altar it is the food of
the offering made by fire unto the lord.
and if his offering be a goat then he shall offer it before
the lord.
and he shall lay his hand upon the head of it and kill it
before the tabernacle of the congregation and the sons of
Aaron shall sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round
about.
and he shall offer thereof his offering even an offering made
by fire unto the lord the fat that covereth the inwards and
all the fat that is upon the inwards
and the two kidneys and the fat that is upon them which is
by the flanks and the caul above the liver with the kidneys
it shall he take away.
and the priest shall burn them upon the altar it is the food
of the offering made by fire for a sweet savour all the fat
is the lord s.
it shall be a perpetual statute for your generations
throughout all your dwellings that ye eat Neither fat nor
blood.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel saying if a soul shall Sin
through ignorance against any of the commandments of the lord
concerning things which ought not to be done and shall do
against any of them
if the priest that is anointed do Sin according to the Sin of
the people then let him bring for his Sin which he hath
sinned a young bullock without blemish unto the lord for a
Sin offering.
and he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation before the lord and shall lay his hand
upon the bullock s head and kill the bullock before the lord.
and the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullock s
blood and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation
and the priest shall dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle
of the blood seven times before the lord before the vail of
the sanctuary.
and the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horns of
the altar of sweet incense before the lord which is in the
tabernacle of the congregation and shall pour all the blood
of the bullock at the bottom of the altar of the burnt
offering which is at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.
and he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for
the Sin offering the fat that covereth the inwards and all
the fat that is upon the inwards
and the two kidneys and the fat that is upon them which is
by the flanks and the caul above the liver with the kidneys
it shall he take away
as it was taken off from the bullock of the sacrifice of peace
offerings and the priest shall burn them upon the altar of
the burnt offering.
and the skin of the bullock and all his flesh with his head
and with his legs and his inwards and his dung
even the whole bullock shall he carry forth without the camp
unto a clean place where the ashes are poured out and burn
him on the wood with fire where the ashes are poured out
shall he be burnt.
and if the whole congregation of Israel Sin through ignorance
and the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly and they
have done somewhat against any of the commandments of the lord
concerning things which should not be done and are guilty
when the Sin which they have sinned against it is known
then the congregation shall offer a young bullock for the Sin
and bring him before the tabernacle of the congregation.
and the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon
the head of the bullock before the lord and the bullock shall
be killed before the lord.
and the priest that is anointed shall bring of the bullock s
blood to the tabernacle of the congregation
and the priest shall dip his finger in some of the blood and
sprinkle it seven times before the lord even before the vail.
and he shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar
which is before the lord that is in the tabernacle of the
congregation and shall pour out all the blood at the bottom
of the altar of the burnt offering which is at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.
and he shall take all his fat from him and burn it upon the
altar.
and he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock
for a Sin offering so shall he do with this and the priest
shall make an atonement for them and it shall be forgiven
them.
and he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp and
burn him as he burned the first bullock it is a Sin offering
for the congregation.
when a ruler hath sinned and done somewhat through ignorance
against any of the commandments of the lord his God concerning
things which should not be done and is guilty
or if his Sin wherein he hath sinned come to his knowledge
he shall bring his offering a kid of the goats a Male
without blemish
and he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat and kill
it in the place where they kill the burnt offering before the
lord it is a Sin offering.
and the priest shall take of the blood of the Sin offering
with his finger and put it upon the horns of the altar of
burnt offering and shall pour out his blood at the bottom of
the altar of burnt offering.
and he shall burn all his fat upon the altar as the fat of
the sacrifice of peace offerings and the priest shall make an
atonement for him as concerning his Sin and it shall be
forgiven him.
and if any one of the common people Sin through ignorance
while he doeth somewhat against any of the commandments of the
lord concerning things which ought not to be done and be
guilty
or if his Sin which he hath sinned come to his knowledge
then he shall bring his offering a kid of the goats a female
without blemish for his Sin which he hath sinned.
and he shall lay his hand upon the head of the Sin offering
and slay the Sin offering in the place of the burnt offering.
and the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his
finger and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt
offering and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the
bottom of the altar.
and he shall take away all the fat thereof as the fat is
taken away from off the sacrifice of peace offerings and the
priest shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour unto
the lord and the priest shall make an atonement for him and
it shall be forgiven him.
and if he bring a lamb for a Sin offering he shall bring it a
female without blemish.
and he shall lay his hand upon the head of the Sin offering
and slay it for a Sin offering in the place where they kill
the burnt offering.
and the priest shall take of the blood of the Sin offering
with his finger and put it upon the horns of the altar of
burnt offering and shall pour out all the blood thereof at
the bottom of the altar
and he shall take away all the fat thereof as the fat of the
lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of the peace offerings
and the priest shall burn them upon the altar according to
the offerings made by fire unto the lord and the priest shall
make an atonement for his Sin that he hath committed and it
shall be forgiven him.
and if a soul Sin and hear the voice of swearing and is a
witness whether he hath seen or known of it if he do not
utter it then he shall bear his iniquity.
or if a soul touch any unclean thing whether it be a carcase
of an unclean beast or a carcase of unclean cattle or the
carcase of unclean creeping things and if it be hidden from
him he also shall be unclean and guilty.
or if he touch the uncleanness of man whatsoever uncleanness
it be that a man shall be defiled withal and it be hid from
him when he knoweth of it then he shall be guilty.
or if a soul swear pronouncing with his lips to do evil or
to do good whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with
an oath and it be hid from him when he knoweth of it then
he shall be guilty in one of these.
and it shall be when he shall be guilty in one of these
things that he shall confess that he hath sinned in that
thing
and he shall bring his trespass offering unto the lord for his
Sin which he hath sinned a female from the flock a lamb or a
kid of the goats for a Sin offering and the priest shall
make an atonement for him concerning his Sin.
and if he be not able to bring a lamb then he shall bring for
his trespass which he hath committed two turtledoves or two
young pigeons unto the lord one for a Sin offering and the
other for a burnt offering.
and he shall bring them unto the priest who shall offer that
which is for the Sin offering first and wring off his head
from his neck but shall not divide it asunder
and he shall sprinkle of the blood of the Sin offering upon
the side of the altar and the rest of the blood shall be
wrung out at the bottom of the altar it is a Sin offering.
and he shall offer the second for a burnt offering according
to the manner and the priest shall make an atonement for him
for his Sin which he hath sinned and it shall be forgiven
him.
but if he be not able to bring two turtledoves or two young
pigeons then he that sinned shall bring for his offering the
tenth part of an Ephah of fine flour for a Sin offering he
shall put no oil upon it Neither shall he put any
frankincense thereon for it is a Sin offering.
then shall he bring it to the priest and the priest shall
take his handful of it even a memorial thereof and burn it
on the altar according to the offerings made by fire unto the
lord it is a Sin offering.
and the priest shall make an atonement for him as touching his
Sin that he hath sinned in one of these and it shall be
forgiven him and the remnant shall be the priest s as a meat
offering.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
if a soul commit a trespass and Sin through ignorance in the
holy things of the lord then he shall bring for his trespass
unto the lord a Ram without blemish out of the flocks with
thy estimation by shekels of Silver after the shekel of the
sanctuary for a trespass offering.
and he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the
holy thing and shall add the fifth part thereto and give it
unto the priest and the priest shall make an atonement for
him with the Ram of the trespass offering and it shall be
forgiven him.
and if a soul Sin and commit any of these things which are
forbidden to be done by the commandments of the lord though
he wist it not yet is he guilty and shall bear his iniquity.
and he shall bring a Ram without blemish out of the flock
with thy estimation for a trespass offering unto the priest
and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his
ignorance wherein he erred and wist it not and it shall be
forgiven him.
it is a trespass offering he hath certainly trespassed
against the lord.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
if a soul Sin and commit a trespass against the lord and lie
unto his neighbour in that which was delivered him to keep or
in fellowship or in a thing taken away by violence or hath
deceived his neighbour
or have found that which was lost and lieth concerning it
and sweareth falsely in any of all these that a man doeth
sinning therein
then it shall be because he hath sinned and is guilty that
he shall restore that which he took violently away or the
thing which he hath deceitfully gotten or that which was
delivered him to keep or the lost thing which he found
or all that about which he hath sworn falsely he shall even
restore it in the principal and shall add the fifth part more
thereto and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth in the
day of his trespass offering.
and he shall bring his trespass offering unto the lord a Ram
without blemish out of the flock with thy estimation for a
trespass offering unto the priest
and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the
lord and it shall be forgiven him for any thing of all that
he hath done in trespassing therein.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
command Aaron and his sons saying this is the law of the
burnt offering it is the burnt offering because of the
burning upon the altar all night unto the morning and the
fire of the altar shall be burning in it.
and the priest shall put on his linen garment and his linen
breeches shall he put upon his flesh and take up the ashes
which the fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the
altar and he shall put them beside the altar.
and he shall put off his garments and put on other garments
and carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.
and the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it it shall
not be put out and the priest shall burn wood on it every
morning and lay the burnt offering in order upon it and he
shall burn thereon the fat of the peace offerings.
the fire shall ever be burning upon the altar it shall never
go out.
and this is the law of the meat offering the sons of Aaron
shall offer it before the lord before the altar.
and he shall take of it his handful of the flour of the meat
offering and of the oil thereof and all the frankincense
which is upon the meat offering and shall burn it upon the
altar for a sweet savour even the memorial of it unto the
lord.
and the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat with
unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place in the
court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it.
it shall not be baken with leaven. I have given it unto them
for their portion of my offerings made by fire it is most
holy as is the Sin offering and as the trespass offering.
all the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it. it
shall be a statute for ever in your generations concerning the
offerings of the lord made by fire every one that toucheth
them shall be holy.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
this is the offering of Aaron and of his sons which they
shall offer unto the lord in the day when he is anointed the
tenth part of an Ephah of fine flour for a meat offering
perpetual half of it in the morning and half thereof at
night.
in a pan it shall be made with oil and when it is baken thou
shalt bring it in and the baken pieces of the meat offering
shalt thou offer for a sweet savour unto the lord.
and the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall
offer it it is a statute for ever unto the lord it shall be
wholly burnt.
for every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt
it shall not be eaten.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto Aaron and to his sons saying this is the law of
the Sin offering in the place where the burnt offering is
killed shall the Sin offering be killed before the lord it is
most holy.
the priest that offereth it for Sin shall eat it in the holy
place shall it be eaten in the court of the tabernacle of the
congregation.
whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy and
when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment
thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy
place.
but the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken
and if it be sodden in a brasen pot it shall be both scoured
and rinsed in water.
all the males among the priests shall eat thereof it is most
holy.
and no Sin offering whereof any of the blood is brought into
the tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the
holy place shall be eaten it shall be burnt in the fire.
likewise this is the law of the trespass offering it is most
holy.
in the place where they kill the burnt offering shall they
kill the trespass offering and the blood thereof shall he
sprinkle round about upon the altar.
and he shall offer of it all the fat thereof the rump and
the fat that covereth the inwards
and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them which is by
the flanks and the caul that is above the liver with the
kidneys it shall he take away
and the priest shall burn them upon the altar for an offering
made by fire unto the lord it is a trespass offering.
every Male among the priests shall eat thereof it shall be
eaten in the holy place it is most holy.
as the Sin offering is so is the trespass offering there is
one law for them the priest that maketh atonement therewith
shall have it.
and the priest that offereth any man s burnt offering even
the priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt
offering which he hath offered.
and all the meat offering that is baken in the oven and all
that is dressed in the fryingpan and in the pan shall be the
priest s that offereth it.
and every meat offering mingled with oil and dry shall all
the sons of Aaron have one as Much as another.
and this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings which
he shall offer unto the lord.
if he offer it for a thanksgiving then he shall offer with
the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with
oil and unleavened wafers anointed with oil and cakes
mingled with oil of fine flour fried.
besides the cakes he shall offer for his offering leavened
bread with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his peace
offerings.
and of it he shall offer one out of the whole oblation for an
heave offering unto the lord and it shall be the priest s
that sprinkleth the blood of the peace offerings.
and the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for
thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is offered
he shall not leave any of it until the morning.
but if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow or a voluntary
offering it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his
sacrifice and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be
eaten
but the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third
day shall be burnt with fire.
and if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace
offerings be eaten at all on the third day it shall not be
accepted Neither shall it be imputed unto him that offereth
it it shall be an abomination and the soul that eateth of it
shall bear his iniquity.
and the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be
eaten it shall be burnt with fire and as for the flesh all
that be clean shall eat thereof.
but the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of
peace offerings that pertain unto the lord having his
uncleanness upon him even that soul shall be cut off from his
people.
moreover the soul that shall touch any unclean thing as the
uncleanness of man or any unclean beast or any abominable
unclean thing and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace
offerings which pertain unto the lord even that soul shall
be cut off from his people.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel saying ye shall eat no
manner of fat of ox or of sheep or of goat.
and the fat of the beast that dieth of itself and the fat of
that which is torn with beasts may be used in any other use
but ye shall in no wise eat of it.
for whosoever eateth the fat of the beast of which men offer
an offering made by fire unto the lord even the soul that
eateth it shall be cut off from his people.
moreover ye shall eat no manner of blood whether it be of
fowl or of beast in any of your dwellings.
whatsoever soul it be that eateth any manner of blood even
that soul shall be cut off from his people.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel saying he that offereth
the sacrifice of his peace offerings unto the lord shall bring
his oblation unto the lord of the sacrifice of his peace
offerings.
his own hands shall bring the offerings of the lord made by
fire the fat with the breast it shall he bring that the
breast may be waved for a wave offering before the lord.
and the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar but the
breast shall be Aaron s and his sons .
and the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an
heave offering of the sacrifices of your peace offerings.
he among the sons of Aaron that offereth the blood of the
peace offerings and the fat shall have the right shoulder
for his part.
for the wave breast and the heave shoulder have I taken of the
children of Israel from off the sacrifices of their peace
offerings and have given them unto Aaron the priest and unto
his sons by a statute for ever from among the children of
Israel.
this is the portion of the anointing of Aaron and of the
anointing of his sons out of the offerings of the lord made
by fire in the day when he presented them to minister unto
the lord in the priest s office
which the lord commanded to be given them of the children of
Israel in the day that he anointed them by a statute for
ever throughout their generations.
this is the law of the burnt offering of the meat offering
and of the Sin offering and of the trespass offering and of
the consecrations and of the sacrifice of the peace
offerings
which the lord commanded Moses in mount Sinai in the day that
he commanded the children of Israel to offer their oblations
unto the lord in the wilderness of Sinai.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
take Aaron and his sons with him and the garments and the
anointing oil and a bullock for the Sin offering and two
rams and a basket of unleavened bread
and gather thou all the congregation together unto the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.
and Moses did as the lord commanded him and the assembly was
gathered together unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.
and Moses said unto the congregation this is the thing which
the lord commanded to be done.
and Moses brought Aaron and his sons and washed them with
water.
and he put upon him the coat and girded him with the girdle
and clothed him with the robe and put the Ephod upon him and
he girded him with the curious girdle of the Ephod and bound
it unto him therewith.
and he put the breastplate upon him also he put in the
breastplate the Urim and the Thummim.
and he put the mitre upon his head also upon the mitre even
upon his forefront did he put the golden plate the holy
crown as the lord commanded Moses.
and Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle
and all that was therein and sanctified them.
and he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times and
anointed the altar and all his vessels both the laver and his
foot to sanctify them.
and he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron s head and
anointed him to sanctify him.
and Moses brought Aaron s sons and put coats upon them and
girded them with girdles and put bonnets upon them as the
lord commanded Moses.
and he brought the bullock for the Sin offering and Aaron and
his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the
Sin offering.
and he slew it and Moses took the blood and put it upon the
horns of the altar round about with his finger and purified
the altar and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar
and sanctified it to make reconciliation upon it.
and he took all the fat that was upon the inwards and the
caul above the liver and the two kidneys and their fat and
Moses burned it upon the altar.
but the bullock and his hide his flesh and his dung he
burnt with fire without the camp as the lord commanded Moses.
and he brought the Ram for the burnt offering and Aaron and
his sons laid their hands upon the head of the Ram.
and he killed it and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar
round about.
and he cut the Ram into pieces and Moses burnt the head and
the pieces and the fat.
and he washed the inwards and the legs in water and Moses
burnt the whole Ram upon the altar it was a burnt sacrifice
for a sweet savour and an offering made by fire unto the
lord as the lord commanded Moses.
and he brought the other Ram the Ram of consecration and
Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the Ram.
and he slew it and Moses took of the blood of it and put it
upon the tip of Aaron s right ear and upon the thumb of his
right hand and upon the great toe of his right foot.
and he brought Aaron s sons and Moses put of the blood upon
the tip of their right ear and upon the thumbs of their right
hands and upon the great toes of their right feet and Moses
sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
and he took the fat and the rump and all the fat that was
upon the inwards and the caul above the liver and the two
kidneys and their fat and the right shoulder
and out of the basket of unleavened bread that was before the
lord he took one unleavened cake and a cake of oiled bread
and one wafer and put them on the fat and upon the right
shoulder
and he put all upon Aaron s hands and upon his sons hands
and waved them for a wave offering before the lord.
and Moses took them from off their hands and burnt them on
the altar upon the burnt offering they were consecrations for
a sweet savour it is an offering made by fire unto the lord.
and Moses took the breast and waved it for a wave offering
before the lord for of the Ram of consecration it was Moses
part as the lord commanded Moses.
and Moses took of the anointing oil and of the blood which
was upon the altar and sprinkled it upon Aaron and upon his
garments and upon his sons and upon his sons garments with
him and sanctified Aaron and his garments and his sons and
his sons garments with him.
and Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons boil the flesh at
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation and there eat
it with the bread that is in the basket of consecrations as I
commanded saying Aaron and his sons shall eat it.
and that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall
ye burn with fire.
and ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation in seven days until the days of your
consecration be at an end for seven days shall he consecrate
you.
as he hath done this day so the lord hath commanded to do to
make an atonement for you.
therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation day and night seven days and keep the charge of
the lord that ye die not for so I Am commanded.
so Aaron and his sons did all things which the lord commanded
by the hand of Moses.
and it came to pass on the eighth day that Moses called Aaron
and his sons and the elders of Israel
and he said unto Aaron take thee a young calf for a Sin
offering and a Ram for a burnt offering without blemish and
offer them before the lord.
and unto the children of Israel thou shalt speak saying take
ye a kid of the goats for a Sin offering and a calf and a
lamb both of the first year without blemish for a burnt
offering
also a bullock and a Ram for peace offerings to sacrifice
before the lord and a meat offering mingled with oil for to
day the lord will appear unto you.
and they brought that which Moses commanded before the
tabernacle of the congregation and all the congregation drew
near and stood before the lord.
and Moses said this is the thing which the lord commanded
that ye should do and the glory of the lord shall appear unto
you.
and Moses said unto Aaron go unto the altar and offer thy
Sin offering and thy burnt offering and make an atonement
for thyself and for the people and offer the offering of the
people and make an atonement for them as the lord commanded.
Aaron therefore went unto the altar and slew the calf of the
Sin offering which was for himself.
and the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him and he
dipped his finger in the blood and put it upon the horns of
the altar and poured out the blood at the bottom of the
altar
but the fat and the kidneys and the caul above the liver of
the Sin offering he burnt upon the altar as the lord
commanded Moses.
and the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the
camp.
and he slew the burnt offering and Aaron s sons presented
unto him the blood which he sprinkled round about upon the
altar.
and they presented the burnt offering unto him with the
pieces thereof and the head and he burnt them upon the
altar.
and he did wash the inwards and the legs and burnt them upon
the burnt offering on the altar.
and he brought the people s offering and took the goat which
was the Sin offering for the people and slew it and offered
it for Sin as the first.
and he brought the burnt offering and offered it according to
the manner.
and he brought the meat offering and took an handful thereof
and burnt it upon the altar beside the burnt sacrifice of the
morning.
he slew also the bullock and the Ram for a sacrifice of peace
offerings which was for the people and Aaron s sons
presented unto him the blood which he sprinkled upon the
altar round about
and the fat of the bullock and of the Ram the rump and that
which covereth the inwards and the kidneys and the caul
above the liver
and they put the fat upon the breasts and he burnt the fat
upon the altar
and the breasts and the right shoulder Aaron waved for a wave
offering before the lord as Moses commanded.
and Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people and blessed
them and came down from offering of the Sin offering and the
burnt offering and peace offerings.
and Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the
congregation and came out and blessed the people and the
glory of the lord appeared unto all the people.
and there came a fire out from before the lord and consumed
upon the altar the burnt offering and the fat which when all
the people saw they shouted and fell on their faces.
and Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron took either of them
his censer and put fire therein and put incense thereon and
offered strange fire before the lord which he commanded them
not.
and there went out fire from the lord and devoured them and
they died before the lord.
then Moses said unto Aaron this is it that the lord spake
saying I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me and
before all the people I will be glorified. and Aaron held his
peace.
and Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan the sons of Uzziel the
uncle of Aaron and said unto them come near carry your
brethren from before the sanctuary out of the camp.
so they went near and carried them in their coats out of the
camp as Moses had said.
and Moses said unto Aaron and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar
his sons uncover not your heads Neither rend your clothes
lest ye die and lest wrath come upon all the people but let
your brethren the whole house of Israel bewail the burning
which the lord hath kindled.
and ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation lest ye die for the anointing oil of the lord
is upon you. and they did according to the word of Moses.
and the lord spake unto Aaron saying
do not drink wine nor strong drink thou nor thy sons with
thee when ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation lest
ye die it shall be a statute for ever throughout your
generations
and that ye may put difference between holy and unholy and
between unclean and clean
and that ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes
which the lord hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.
and Moses spake unto Aaron and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar
his sons that were left take the meat offering that remaineth
of the offerings of the lord made by fire and eat it without
leaven beside the altar for it is most holy
and ye shall eat it in the holy place because it is thy due
and thy sons due of the sacrifices of the lord made by fire
for so I Am commanded.
and the wave breast and heave shoulder shall ye eat in a clean
place thou and thy sons and thy daughters with thee for
they be thy due and thy sons due which are given out of the
sacrifices of peace offerings of the children of Israel.
the heave shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with
the offerings made by fire of the fat to wave it for a wave
offering before the lord and it shall be thine and thy sons
with thee by a statute for ever as the lord hath commanded.
and Moses diligently sought the goat of the Sin offering and
behold it was burnt and he was angry with Eleazar and
Ithamar the sons of Aaron which were left alive saying
wherefore have ye not eaten the Sin offering in the holy
place seeing it is most holy and God hath given it you to
bear the iniquity of the congregation to make atonement for
them before the lord?
behold the blood of it was not brought in within the holy
place ye should indeed have eaten it in the holy place as I
commanded.
and Aaron said unto Moses behold this day have they offered
their Sin offering and their burnt offering before the lord
and such things have befallen me and if I had eaten the Sin
offering to day should it have been accepted in the sight of
the lord?
and when Moses heard that he was content.
and the lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron saying unto them
speak unto the children of Israel saying these are the
beasts which ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on the
earth.
whatsoever parteth the hoof and is clovenfooted and cheweth
the cud among the beasts that shall ye eat.
nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud
or of them that divide the hoof as the camel because he
cheweth the cud but divideth not the hoof he is unclean unto
you.
and the coney because he cheweth the cud but divideth not
the hoof he is unclean unto you.
and the hare because he cheweth the cud but divideth not the
hoof he is unclean unto you.
and the swine though he divide the hoof and be clovenfooted
yet he cheweth not the cud he is unclean to you.
of their flesh shall ye not eat and their carcase shall ye
not touch they are unclean to you.
these shall ye eat of all that are in the waters whatsoever
hath fins and scales in the waters in the seas and in the
rivers them shall ye eat.
and all that have not fins and scales in the seas and in the
rivers of all that move in the waters and of any living
thing which is in the waters they shall be an abomination
unto you
they shall be even an abomination unto you ye shall not eat
of their flesh but ye shall have their carcases in
abomination.
whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters that shall
be an abomination unto you.
and these are they which ye shall have in abomination among
the fowls they shall not be eaten they are an abomination
the eagle and the ossifrage and the ospray
and the vulture and the kite after his kind
every raven after his kind
and the owl and the night hawk and the cuckow and the hawk
after his kind
and the little owl and the cormorant and the great owl
and the swan and the pelican and the gier eagle
and the stork the heron after her kind and the lapwing and
the bat.
all fowls that creep going upon all four shall be an
abomination unto you.
yet these may ye eat of every flying creeping thing that goeth
upon all four which have legs above their feet to leap
withal upon the earth
even these of them ye may eat the locust after his kind and
the bald locust after his kind and the beetle after his kind
and the grasshopper after his kind.
but all other flying creeping things which have four feet
shall be an abomination unto you.
and for these ye shall be unclean whosoever toucheth the
carcase of them shall be unclean until the even.
and whosoever beareth ought of the carcase of them shall wash
his clothes and be unclean until the even.
the carcases of every beast which divideth the hoof and is
not clovenfooted nor cheweth the cud are unclean unto you
every one that toucheth them shall be unclean.
and whatsoever goeth upon his paws among all manner of beasts
that go on all four those are unclean unto you whoso
toucheth their carcase shall be unclean until the even.
and he that beareth the carcase of them shall wash his
clothes and be unclean until the even they are unclean unto
you.
these also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping things
that creep upon the earth the weasel and the mouse and the
tortoise after his kind
and the ferret and the chameleon and the lizard and the
snail and the mole.
these are unclean to you among all that creep whosoever doth
touch them when they be dead shall be unclean until the
even.
and upon whatsoever any of them when they are dead doth
fall it shall be unclean whether it be any vessel of wood
or raiment or skin or sack whatsoever vessel it be wherein
any work is done it must be put into water and it shall be
unclean until the even so it shall be cleansed.
and every earthen vessel whereinto any of them falleth
whatsoever is in it shall be unclean and ye shall break it.
of all meat which may be eaten that on which such water
cometh shall be unclean and all drink that may be drunk in
every such vessel shall be unclean.
and every thing whereupon any part of their carcase falleth
shall be unclean whether it be oven or ranges for pots they
shall be broken down for they are unclean and shall be
unclean unto you.
nevertheless a fountain or pit wherein there is plenty of
water shall be clean but that which toucheth their carcase
shall be unclean.
and if any part of their carcase fall upon any sowing seed
which is to be sown it shall be clean.
but if any water be put upon the seed and any part of their
carcase fall thereon it shall be unclean unto you.
and if any beast of which ye may eat die he that toucheth
the carcase thereof shall be unclean until the even.
and he that eateth of the carcase of it shall wash his
clothes and be unclean until the even he also that beareth
the carcase of it shall wash his clothes and be unclean until
the even.
and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth shall be
an abomination it shall not be eaten.
whatsoever goeth upon the belly and whatsoever goeth upon all
four or whatsoever hath more feet among all creeping things
that creep upon the earth them ye shall not eat for they are
an abomination.
ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping
thing that creepeth Neither shall ye make yourselves unclean
with them that ye should be defiled thereby.
for I Am the lord your God ye shall therefore sanctify
yourselves and ye shall be holy for I Am holy Neither shall
ye defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth.
for I Am the lord that bringeth you up out of the land of
Egypt to be your God ye shall therefore be holy for I Am
holy.
this is the law of the beasts and of the fowl and of every
living creature that moveth in the waters and of every
creature that creepeth upon the earth
to make a difference between the unclean and the clean and
between the beast that may be eaten and the beast that may not
be eaten.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel saying if a woman have
conceived seed and born a man child then she shall be
unclean seven days according to the days of the separation
for her infirmity shall she be unclean.
and in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be
circumcised.
and she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying
three and thirty days she shall touch no hallowed thing nor
come into the sanctuary until the days of her purifying be
fulfilled.
but if she bear a maid child then she shall be unclean two
weeks as in her separation and she shall continue in the
blood of her purifying threescore and six days.
and when the days of her purifying are fulfilled for a son
or for a daughter she shall bring a lamb of the first year
for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or a turtledove for
a Sin offering unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation unto the priest
who shall offer it before the lord and make an atonement for
her and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood.
this is the law for her that hath born a Male or a female.
and if she be not able to bring a lamb then she shall bring
two turtles or two young pigeons the one for the burnt
offering and the other for a Sin offering and the priest
shall make an atonement for her and she shall be clean.
and the lord spake unto Moses and Aaron saying
when a man shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising a
scab or bright spot and it be in the skin of his flesh like
the plague of leprosy then he shall be brought unto Aaron the
priest or unto one of his sons the priests
and the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of the
flesh and when the hair in the plague is turned white and
the plague in sight be deeper than the skin of his flesh it
is a plague of leprosy and the priest shall look on him and
pronounce him unclean.
if the bright spot be white in the skin of his flesh and in
sight be not deeper than the skin and the hair thereof be not
turned white then the priest shall shut up him that hath the
plague seven days
and the priest shall look on him the seventh day and behold
if the plague in his sight be at a stay and the plague spread
not in the skin then the priest shall shut him up seven days
more
and the priest shall look on him again the seventh day and
behold if the plague be somewhat dark and the plague spread
not in the skin the priest shall pronounce him clean it is
but a scab and he shall wash his clothes and be clean.
but if the scab spread Much abroad in the skin after that he
hath been seen of the priest for his cleansing he shall be
seen of the priest again.
and if the priest see that behold the scab spreadeth in the
skin then the priest shall pronounce him unclean it is a
leprosy.
when the plague of leprosy is in a man then he shall be
brought unto the priest
and the priest shall see him and behold if the rising be
white in the skin and it have turned the hair white and
there be quick raw flesh in the rising
it is an old leprosy in the skin of his flesh and the priest
shall pronounce him unclean and shall not shut him up for he
is unclean.
and if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin and the leprosy
cover all the skin of him that hath the plague from his head
even to his foot wheresoever the priest looketh
then the priest shall consider and behold if the leprosy
have covered all his flesh he shall pronounce him clean that
hath the plague it is all turned white he is clean.
but when raw flesh appeareth in him he shall be unclean.
and the priest shall see the raw flesh and pronounce him to
be unclean for the raw flesh is unclean it is a leprosy.
or if the raw flesh turn again and be changed unto white he
shall come unto the priest
and the priest shall see him and behold if the plague be
turned into white then the priest shall pronounce him clean
that hath the plague he is clean.
the flesh also in which even in the skin thereof was a
boil and is healed
and in the place of the boil there be a white rising or a
bright spot white and somewhat reddish and it be shewed to
the priest
and if when the priest seeth it behold it be in sight lower
than the skin and the hair thereof be turned white the
priest shall pronounce him unclean it is a plague of leprosy
broken out of the boil.
but if the priest look on it and behold there be no white
hairs therein and if it be not lower than the skin but be
somewhat dark then the priest shall shut him up seven days
and if it spread Much abroad in the skin then the priest
shall pronounce him unclean it is a plague.
but if the bright spot stay in his place and spread not it
is a burning boil and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
or if there be any flesh in the skin whereof there is a hot
burning and the quick flesh that burneth have a white bright
spot somewhat reddish or white
then the priest shall look upon it and behold if the hair
in the bright spot be turned white and it be in sight deeper
than the skin it is a leprosy broken out of the burning
wherefore the priest shall pronounce him unclean it is the
plague of leprosy.
but if the priest look on it and behold there be no white
hair in the bright spot and it be no lower than the other
skin but be somewhat dark then the priest shall shut him up
seven days
and the priest shall look upon him the seventh day and if it
be spread Much abroad in the skin then the priest shall
pronounce him unclean it is the plague of leprosy.
and if the bright spot stay in his place and spread not in
the skin but it be somewhat dark it is a rising of the
burning and the priest shall pronounce him clean for it is
an inflammation of the burning.
if a man or woman have a plague upon the head or the beard
then the priest shall see the plague and behold if it be in
sight deeper than the skin and there be in it a yellow thin
hair then the priest shall pronounce him unclean it is a dry
scall even a leprosy upon the head or beard.
and if the priest look on the plague of the scall and
behold it be not in sight deeper than the skin and that
there is no black hair in it then the priest shall shut up
him that hath the plague of the scall seven days
and in the seventh day the priest shall look on the plague
and behold if the scall spread not and there be in it no
yellow hair and the scall be not in sight deeper than the
skin
he shall be shaven but the scall shall he not shave and the
priest shall shut up him that hath the scall seven days more
and in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall
and behold if the scall be not spread in the skin nor be in
sight deeper than the skin then the priest shall pronounce
him clean and he shall wash his clothes and be clean.
but if the scall spread Much in the skin after his cleansing
then the priest shall look on him and behold if the scall
be spread in the skin the priest shall not seek for yellow
hair he is unclean.
but if the scall be in his sight at a stay and that there is
black hair grown up therein the scall is healed he is clean
and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
if a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh
bright spots even white bright spots
then the priest shall look and behold if the bright spots
in the skin of their flesh be darkish white it is a freckled
spot that groweth in the skin he is clean.
and the man whose hair is fallen off his head he is bald yet
is he clean.
and he that hath his hair fallen off from the part of his head
toward his face he is forehead bald yet is he clean.
and if there be in the bald head or bald forehead a white
reddish sore it is a leprosy sprung up in his bald head or
his bald forehead.
then the priest shall look upon it and behold if the rising
of the sore be white reddish in his bald head or in his bald
forehead as the leprosy appeareth in the skin of the flesh
he is a leprous man he is unclean the priest shall pronounce
him utterly unclean his plague is in his head.
and the leper in whom the plague is his clothes shall be
rent and his head bare and he shall put a covering upon his
upper lip and shall cry unclean unclean.
all the days wherein the plague shall be in him he shall be
defiled he is unclean he shall dwell alone without the camp
shall his habitation be.
the garment also that the plague of leprosy is in whether it
be a woollen garment or a linen garment
whether it be in the warp or woof of linen or of woollen
whether in a skin or in any thing made of skin
and if the plague be greenish or reddish in the garment or in
the skin either in the warp or in the woof or in any thing
of skin it is a plague of leprosy and shall be shewed unto
the priest
and the priest shall look upon the plague and shut up it that
hath the plague seven days
and he shall look on the plague on the seventh day if the
plague be spread in the garment either in the warp or in the
woof or in a skin or in any work that is made of skin the
plague is a fretting leprosy it is unclean.
he shall therefore burn that garment whether warp or woof in
woollen or in linen or any thing of skin wherein the plague
is for it is a fretting leprosy it shall be burnt in the
fire.
and if the priest shall look and behold the plague be not
spread in the garment either in the warp or in the woof or
in any thing of skin
then the priest shall command that they wash the thing wherein
the plague is and he shall shut it up seven days more
and the priest shall look on the plague after that it is
washed and behold if the plague have not changed his
colour and the plague be not spread it is unclean thou
shalt burn it in the fire it is fret inward whether it be
bare within or without.
and if the priest look and behold the plague be somewhat
dark after the washing of it then he shall rend it out of the
garment or out of the skin or out of the warp or out of the
woof
and if it appear still in the garment either in the warp or
in the woof or in any thing of skin it is a spreading
plague thou shalt burn that wherein the plague is with fire.
and the garment either warp or woof or whatsoever thing of
skin it be which thou shalt wash if the plague be departed
from them then it shall be washed the second time and shall
be clean.
this is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of
woollen or linen either in the warp or woof or any thing of
skins to pronounce it clean or to pronounce it unclean.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
this shall be the law of the leper in the day of his
cleansing he shall be brought unto the priest
and the priest shall go forth out of the camp and the priest
shall look and behold if the plague of leprosy be healed in
the leper
then shall the priest command to take for him that is to be
cleansed two birds alive and clean and cedar wood and
scarlet and hyssop
and the priest shall command that one of the birds be killed
in an earthen vessel over running water
as for the living bird he shall take it and the cedar wood
and the scarlet and the hyssop and shall dip them and the
living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the
running water
and he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the
leprosy seven times and shall pronounce him clean and shall
let the living bird loose into the open field.
and he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes and
shave off all his hair and wash himself in water that he may
be clean and after that he shall come into the camp and
shall tarry abroad out of his tent seven days.
but it shall be on the seventh day that he shall shave all
his hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows even all
his hair he shall shave off and he shall wash his clothes
also he shall wash his flesh in water and he shall be clean.
and on the eighth day he shall take two he lambs without
blemish and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish
and three tenth deals of fine flour for a meat offering
mingled with oil and one log of oil.
and the priest that maketh him clean shall present the man
that is to be made clean and those things before the lord
at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation
and the priest shall take one he lamb and offer him for a
trespass offering and the log of oil and wave them for a
wave offering before the lord
and he shall slay the lamb in the place where he shall kill
the Sin offering and the burnt offering in the holy place
for as the Sin offering is the priest s so is the trespass
offering it is most holy
and the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass
offering and the priest shall put it upon the tip of the
right ear of him that is to be cleansed and upon the thumb of
his right hand and upon the great toe of his right foot
and the priest shall take some of the log of oil and pour it
into the palm of his own left hand
and the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is
in his left hand and shall sprinkle of the oil with his
finger seven times before the lord
and of the rest of the oil that is in his hand shall the
priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be
cleansed and upon the thumb of his right hand and upon the
great toe of his right foot upon the blood of the trespass
offering
and the remnant of the oil that is in the priest s hand he
shall pour upon the head of him that is to be cleansed and
the priest shall make an atonement for him before the lord.
and the priest shall offer the Sin offering and make an
atonement for him that is to be cleansed from his uncleanness
and afterward he shall kill the burnt offering
and the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the meat
offering upon the altar and the priest shall make an
atonement for him and he shall be clean.
and if he be poor and cannot get so Much then he shall take
one lamb for a trespass offering to be waved to make an
atonement for him and one tenth deal of fine flour mingled
with oil for a meat offering and a log of oil
and two turtledoves or two young pigeons such as he is able
to get and the one shall be a Sin offering and the other a
burnt offering.
and he shall bring them on the eighth day for his cleansing
unto the priest unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation before the lord.
and the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering
and the log of oil and the priest shall wave them for a wave
offering before the lord
and he shall kill the lamb of the trespass offering and the
priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering
and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be
cleansed and upon the thumb of his right hand and upon the
great toe of his right foot
and the priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own
left hand
and the priest shall sprinkle with his right finger some of
the oil that is in his left hand seven times before the lord
and the priest shall put of the oil that is in his hand upon
the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed and
upon the thumb of his right hand and upon the great toe of
his right foot upon the place of the blood of the trespass
offering
and the rest of the oil that is in the priest s hand he shall
put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed to make an
atonement for him before the lord.
and he shall offer the one of the turtledoves or of the young
pigeons such as he can get
even such as he is able to get the one for a Sin offering
and the other for a burnt offering with the meat offering
and the priest shall make an atonement for him that is to be
cleansed before the lord.
this is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy whose
hand is not able to get that which pertaineth to his
cleansing.
and the lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying
when ye be come into the land of Canaan which I give to you
for a possession and I put the plague of leprosy in a house
of the land of your possession
and he that owneth the house shall come and tell the priest
saying it seemeth to me there is as it were a plague in the
house
then the priest shall command that they empty the house
before the priest go into it to see the plague that all that
is in the house be not made unclean and afterward the priest
shall go in to see the house
and he shall look on the plague and behold if the plague be
in the walls of the house with hollow strakes greenish or
reddish which in sight are lower than the wall
then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the
house and shut up the house seven days
and the priest shall come again the seventh day and shall
look and behold if the plague be spread in the walls of the
house
then the priest shall command that they take away the stones
in which the plague is and they shall cast them into an
unclean place without the city
and he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about
and they shall pour out the dust that they scrape off without
the city into an unclean place
and they shall take other stones and put them in the place of
those stones and he shall take other morter and shall
plaister the house.
and if the plague come again and break out in the house
after that he hath taken away the stones and after he hath
scraped the house and after it is plaistered
then the priest shall come and look and behold if the
plague be spread in the house it is a fretting leprosy in the
house it is unclean.
and he shall break down the house the stones of it and the
timber thereof and all the morter of the house and he shall
carry them forth out of the city into an unclean place.
moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it is
shut up shall be unclean until the even.
and he that lieth in the house shall wash his clothes and he
that eateth in the house shall wash his clothes.
and if the priest shall come in and look upon it and
behold the plague hath not spread in the house after the
house was plaistered then the priest shall pronounce the
house clean because the plague is healed.
and he shall take to cleanse the house two birds and cedar
wood and scarlet and hyssop
and he shall kill the one of the birds in an earthen vessel
over running water
and he shall take the cedar wood and the hyssop and the
scarlet and the living bird and dip them in the blood of the
slain bird and in the running water and sprinkle the house
seven times
and he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird and
with the running water and with the living bird and with the
cedar wood and with the hyssop and with the scarlet
but he shall let go the living bird out of the city into the
open fields and make an atonement for the house and it shall
be clean.
this is the law for all manner of plague of leprosy and
scall
and for the leprosy of a garment and of a house
and for a rising and for a scab and for a bright spot
to teach when it is unclean and when it is clean this is the
law of leprosy.
and the lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them when any
man hath a running issue out of his flesh because of his
issue he is unclean.
and this shall be his uncleanness in his issue whether his
flesh run with his issue or his flesh be stopped from his
issue it is his uncleanness.
every bed whereon he lieth that hath the issue is unclean
and every thing whereon he sitteth shall be unclean.
and whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes and
bathe himself in water and be unclean until the even.
and he that sitteth on any thing whereon he sat that hath the
issue shall wash his clothes and bathe himself in water and
be unclean until the even.
and he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue
shall wash his clothes and bathe himself in water and be
unclean until the even.
and if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean
then he shall wash his clothes and bathe himself in water
and be unclean until the even.
and what saddle soever he rideth upon that hath the issue
shall be unclean.
and whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shall be
unclean until the even and he that beareth any of those
things shall wash his clothes and bathe himself in water and
be unclean until the even.
and whomsoever he toucheth that hath the issue and hath not
rinsed his hands in water he shall wash his clothes and
bathe himself in water and be unclean until the even.
and the vessel of earth that he toucheth which hath the
issue shall be broken and every vessel of wood shall be
rinsed in water.
and when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue then
he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing and
wash his clothes and bathe his flesh in running water and
shall be clean.
and on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtledoves or
two young pigeons and come before the lord unto the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation and give them unto the
priest
and the priest shall offer them the one for a Sin offering
and the other for a burnt offering and the priest shall make
an atonement for him before the lord for his issue.
and if any man s seed of copulation go out from him then he
shall wash all his flesh in water and be unclean until the
even.
and every garment and every skin whereon is the seed of
copulation shall be washed with water and be unclean until
the even.
the woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of
copulation they shall both bathe themselves in water and be
unclean until the even.
and if a woman have an issue and her issue in her flesh be
blood she shall be put apart seven days and whosoever
toucheth her shall be unclean until the even.
and every thing that she lieth upon in her separation shall be
unclean every thing also that she sitteth upon shall be
unclean.
and whosoever toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes and
bathe himself in water and be unclean until the even.
and whosoever toucheth any thing that she sat upon shall wash
his clothes and bathe himself in water and be unclean until
the even.
and if it be on her bed or on any thing whereon she sitteth
when he toucheth it he shall be unclean until the even.
and if any man lie with her at all and her flowers be upon
him he shall be unclean seven days and all the bed whereon
he lieth shall be unclean.
and if a woman have an issue of her blood many days out of the
time of her separation or if it run beyond the time of her
separation all the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall
be as the days of her separation she shall be unclean.
every bed whereon she lieth all the days of her issue shall be
unto her as the bed of her separation and whatsoever she
sitteth upon shall be unclean as the uncleanness of her
separation.
and whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean and
shall wash his clothes and bathe himself in water and be
unclean until the even.
but if she be cleansed of her issue then she shall number to
herself seven days and after that she shall be clean.
and on the eighth day she shall take unto her two turtles or
two young pigeons and bring them unto the priest to the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation.
and the priest shall offer the one for a Sin offering and the
other for a burnt offering and the priest shall make an
atonement for her before the lord for the issue of her
uncleanness.
thus shall ye separate the children of Israel from their
uncleanness that they die not in their uncleanness when they
defile my tabernacle that is among them.
this is the law of him that hath an issue and of him whose
seed goeth from him and is defiled therewith
and of her that is sick of her flowers and of him that hath
an issue of the man and of the woman and of him that lieth
with her that is unclean.
and the lord spake unto Moses after the death of the two sons
of Aaron when they offered before the lord and died
and the lord said unto Moses speak unto Aaron thy brother
that he come not at all times into the holy place within the
vail before the mercy seat which is upon the ark that he die
not for I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat.
thus shall Aaron come into the holy place with a young
bullock for a Sin offering and a Ram for a burnt offering.
he shall put on the holy linen coat and he shall have the
linen breeches upon his flesh and shall be girded with a
linen girdle and with the linen mitre shall he be attired
these are holy garments therefore shall he wash his flesh in
water and so put them on.
and he shall take of the congregation of the children of
Israel two kids of the goats for a Sin offering and one Ram
for a burnt offering.
and Aaron shall offer his bullock of the Sin offering which
is for himself and make an atonement for himself and for his
house.
and he shall take the two goats and present them before the
lord at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
and Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats one Lot for the
lord and the other Lot for the scapegoat.
and Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the lord s Lot fell
and offer him for a Sin offering.
but the goat on which the Lot fell to be the scapegoat shall
be presented alive before the lord to make an atonement with
him and to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.
and Aaron shall bring the bullock of the Sin offering which
is for himself and shall make an atonement for himself and
for his house and shall kill the bullock of the Sin offering
which is for himself
and he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire from
off the altar before the lord and his hands full of sweet
incense beaten small and bring it within the vail
and he shall put the incense upon the fire before the lord
that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat that is
upon the testimony that he die not
and he shall take of the blood of the bullock and sprinkle it
with his finger upon the mercy seat eastward and before the
mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger
seven times.
then shall he kill the goat of the Sin offering that is for
the people and bring his blood within the vail and do with
that blood as he did with the blood of the bullock and
sprinkle it upon the mercy seat and before the mercy seat
and he shall make an atonement for the holy place because of
the uncleanness of the children of Israel and because of
their transgressions in all their sins and so shall he do for
the tabernacle of the congregation that remaineth among them
in the midst of their uncleanness.
and there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the
congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy
place until he come out and have made an atonement for
himself and for his household and for all the congregation
of Israel.
and he shall go out unto the altar that is before the lord
and make an atonement for it and shall take of the blood of
the bullock and of the blood of the goat and put it upon the
horns of the altar round about.
and he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger
seven times and cleanse it and hallow it from the
uncleanness of the children of Israel.
and when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place
and the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar he
shall bring the live goat
and Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live
goat and confess over him all the iniquities of the children
of Israel and all their transgressions in all their sins
putting them upon the head of the goat and shall send him
away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness
and the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a
land not inhabited and he shall let go the goat in the
wilderness.
and Aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation
and shall put off the linen garments which he put on when he
went into the holy place and shall leave them there
and he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place and
put on his garments and come forth and offer his burnt
offering and the burnt offering of the people and make an
atonement for himself and for the people.
and the fat of the Sin offering shall he burn upon the altar.
and he that let go the goat for the scapegoat shall wash his
clothes and bathe his flesh in water and afterward come into
the camp.
and the bullock for the Sin offering and the goat for the Sin
offering whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the
holy place shall one carry forth without the camp and they
shall burn in the fire their skins and their flesh and their
dung.
and he that burneth them shall wash his clothes and bathe his
flesh in water and afterward he shall come into the camp.
and this shall be a statute for ever unto you that in the
seventh month on the tenth day of the month ye shall afflict
your souls and do no work at all whether it be one of your
own country or a stranger that sojourneth among you
for on that day shall the priest make an atonement for you to
cleanse you that ye may be clean from all your sins before
the lord.
it shall be a sabbath of rest unto you and ye shall afflict
your souls by a statute for ever.
and the priest whom he shall anoint and whom he shall
consecrate to minister in the priest s office in his father s
stead shall make the atonement and shall put on the linen
clothes even the holy garments
and he shall make an atonement for the holy sanctuary and he
shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of the
congregation and for the altar and he shall make an
atonement for the priests and for all the people of the
congregation.
and this shall be an everlasting statute unto you to make an
atonement for the children of Israel for all their sins once a
year. and he did as the lord commanded Moses.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto Aaron and unto his sons and unto all the children
of Israel and say unto them this is the thing which the lord
hath commanded saying
what man soever there be of the house of Israel that killeth
an ox or lamb or goat in the camp or that killeth it out
of the camp
and bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation to offer an offering unto the lord before the
tabernacle of the lord blood shall be imputed unto that man
he hath shed blood and that man shall be cut off from among
his people
to the end that the children of Israel may bring their
sacrifices which they offer in the open field even that they
may bring them unto the lord unto the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation unto the priest and offer them for peace
offerings unto the lord.
and the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the
lord at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation and
burn the fat for a sweet savour unto the lord.
and they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils
after whom they have gone a whoring. this shall be a statute
for ever unto them throughout their generations.
and thou shalt say unto them whatsoever man there be of the
house of Israel or of the strangers which Sojourn among you
that offereth a burnt offering or sacrifice
and bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation to offer it unto the lord even that man shall
be cut off from among his people.
and whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel or of the
strangers that Sojourn among you that eateth any manner of
blood I will even set my face against that soul that eateth
blood and will cut him off from among his people.
for the life of the flesh is in the blood and I have given it
to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls for
it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.
therefore I said unto the children of Israel no soul of you
shall eat blood Neither shall any stranger that sojourneth
among you eat blood.
and whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel or of
the strangers that Sojourn among you which hunteth and
catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten he shall even
pour out the blood thereof and cover it with dust.
for it is the life of all flesh the blood of it is for the
life thereof therefore I said unto the children of Israel ye
shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh for the life of all
flesh is the blood thereof whosoever eateth it shall be cut
off.
and every soul that eateth that which died of itself or that
which was torn with beasts whether it be one of your own
country or a stranger he shall both wash his clothes and
bathe himself in water and be unclean until the even then
shall he be clean.
but if he wash them not nor bathe his flesh then he shall
bear his iniquity.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them I Am the
lord your God.
after the doings of the land of Egypt wherein ye dwelt shall
ye not do and after the doings of the land of Canaan whither
I bring you shall ye not do Neither shall ye walk in their
ordinances.
ye shall do my judgments and keep mine ordinances to walk
therein I Am the lord your God.
ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments which
if a man do he shall live in them I Am the lord.
none of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him
to uncover their nakedness I Am the lord.
the nakedness of thy father or the nakedness of thy mother
shalt thou not uncover she is thy mother thou shalt not
uncover her nakedness.
the nakedness of thy father s wife shalt thou not uncover it
is thy father s nakedness.
the nakedness of thy sister the daughter of thy father or
daughter of thy mother whether she be born at home or born
abroad even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover.
the nakedness of thy son s daughter or of thy daughter s
daughter even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover for
theirs is thine own nakedness.
the nakedness of thy father s wife s daughter begotten of thy
father she is thy sister thou shalt not uncover her
nakedness.
thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father s sister
she is thy father s near kinswoman.
thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother s sister
for she is thy mother s near kinswoman.
thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father s brother
thou shalt not approach to his wife she is thine aunt.
thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law
she is thy son s wife thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.
thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother s wife it
is thy brother s nakedness.
thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her
daughter Neither shalt thou take her son s daughter or her
daughter s daughter to uncover her nakedness for they are
her near kinswomen it is wickedness.
Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister to vex her to
uncover her nakedness beside the other in her life time.
also thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncover her
nakedness as long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.
moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour s
wife to defile thyself with her.
and thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire
to Molech Neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God I
Am the lord.
thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind it is
abomination.
Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself
therewith Neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie
down thereto it is confusion.
defile not ye yourselves in any of these things for in all
these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you
and the land is defiled therefore I do visit the iniquity
thereof upon it and the land itself vomiteth out her
inhabitants.
ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments and
shall not commit any of these abominations Neither any of
your own nation nor any stranger that sojourneth among you
 for all these abominations have the men of the land done
which were before you and the land is defiled
that the land spue not you out also when ye defile it as it
spued out the nations that were before you.
for whosoever shall commit any of these abominations even the
souls that commit them shall be cut off from among their
people.
therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance that ye commit not any
one of these abominable customs which were committed before
you and that ye defile not yourselves therein I Am the lord
your God.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto all the congregation of the children of Israel and
say unto them ye shall be holy for I the lord your God Am
holy.
ye shall fear every man his mother and his father and keep
my sabbaths I Am the lord your God.
turn ye not unto idols nor make to yourselves molten gods I
Am the lord your God.
and if ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the lord
ye shall offer it at your own will.
it shall be eaten the same day ye offer it and on the morrow
and if ought remain until the third day it shall be burnt in
the fire.
and if it be eaten at all on the third day it is abominable
it shall not be accepted.
therefore every one that eateth it shall bear his iniquity
because he hath profaned the hallowed thing of the lord and
that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
and when ye reap the harvest of your land thou shalt not
wholly reap the corners of thy field Neither shalt thou
gather the gleanings of thy harvest.
and thou shalt not glean thy vineyard Neither shalt thou
gather every grape of thy vineyard thou shalt leave them for
the poor and stranger I Am the lord your God.
ye shall not steal Neither deal falsely Neither lie one to
another.
and ye shall not swear by my name falsely Neither shalt thou
profane the name of thy God I Am the lord.
thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour Neither rob him the
wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night
until the morning.
thou shalt not curse the deaf nor put a stumblingblock before
the blind but shalt fear thy God I Am the lord.
ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment thou shalt not
respect the person of the poor nor honor the person of the
Mighty but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.
thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy
people Neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy
neighbour I Am the lord.
thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart thou shalt in
any wise rebuke thy neighbour and not suffer Sin upon him.
thou shalt not avenge nor bear any grudge against the
children of thy people but thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself I Am the lord.
ye shall keep my statutes. thou shalt not let thy cattle
gender with a diverse kind thou shalt not sow thy field with
mingled seed Neither shall a garment mingled of linen and
woollen come upon thee.
and whosoever lieth carnally with a woman that is a bondmaid
betrothed to an husband and not at all redeemed nor freedom
given her she shall be scourged they shall not be put to
death because she was not free.
and he shall bring his trespass offering unto the lord unto
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation even a Ram for
a trespass offering.
and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the Ram of
the trespass offering before the lord for his Sin which he
hath done and the Sin which he hath done shall be forgiven
him.
and when ye shall come into the land and shall have planted
all manner of trees for food then ye shall count the fruit
thereof as uncircumcised three years shall it be as
uncircumcised unto you it shall not be eaten of.
but in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to
praise the lord withal.
and in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof that
it may yield unto you the increase thereof I Am the lord your
God.
ye shall not eat any thing with the blood Neither shall ye
use enchantment nor observe times.
ye shall not round the corners of your heads Neither shalt
thou mar the corners of thy beard.
ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead nor
print any marks upon you I Am the lord.
do not prostitute thy daughter to cause her to be a whore
lest the land fall to whoredom and the land become full of
wickedness.
ye shall keep my sabbaths and reverence my sanctuary I Am
the lord.
regard not them that have familiar spirits Neither seek after
wizards to be defiled by them I Am the lord your God.
thou shalt rise up before the hoary head and honour the face
of the old man and fear thy God I Am the lord.
and if a stranger Sojourn with thee in your land ye shall not
vex him.
but the stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as
one born among you and thou shalt love him as thyself for ye
were strangers in the land of Egypt I Am the lord your God.
ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment in meteyard in
weight or in measure.
just balances just weights a just Ephah and a just hin
shall ye have I Am the lord your God which brought you out
of the land of Egypt.
therefore shall ye observe all my statutes and all my
judgments and do them I Am the lord.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
again thou shalt say to the children of Israel whosoever he
be of the children of Israel or of the strangers that Sojourn
in Israel that giveth any of his seed unto Molech he shall
surely be put to death the people of the land shall stone him
with stones.
and I will set my face against that man and will cut him off
from among his people because he hath given of his seed unto
Molech to defile my sanctuary and to profane my holy name.
and if the people of the land do any ways hide their eyes from
the man when he giveth of his seed unto Molech and kill him
not
then I will set my face against that man and against his
family and will cut him off and all that go a whoring after
him to commit whoredom with Molech from among their people.
and the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits
and after wizards to go a whoring after them I will even set
my face against that soul and will cut him off from among his
people.
sanctify yourselves therefore and be ye holy for I Am the
lord your God.
and ye shall keep my statutes and do them I Am the lord
which sanctify you.
for every one that curseth his father or his mother shall be
surely put to death he hath cursed his father or his mother
his blood shall be upon him.
and the man that committeth adultery with another man s wife
even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour s wife
the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.
and the man that lieth with his father s wife hath uncovered
his father s nakedness both of them shall surely be put to
death their blood shall be upon them.
and if a man lie with his daughter in law both of them shall
surely be put to death they have wrought confusion their
blood shall be upon them.
if a man also lie with mankind as he lieth with a woman both
of them have committed an abomination they shall surely be
put to death their blood shall be upon them.
and if a man take a wife and her mother it is wickedness
they shall be burnt with fire both he and they that there be
no wickedness among you.
and if a man lie with a beast he shall surely be put to
death and ye shall slay the beast.
and if a woman approach unto any beast and lie down thereto
thou shalt kill the woman and the beast they shall surely be
put to death their blood shall be upon them.
and if a man shall take his sister his father s daughter or
his mother s daughter and see her nakedness and she see his
nakedness it is a wicked thing and they shall be cut off in
the sight of their people he hath uncovered his sister s
nakedness he shall bear his iniquity.
and if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness and
shall uncover her nakedness he hath discovered her fountain
and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blood and both of
them shall be cut off from among their people.
and thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother s
sister nor of thy father s sister for he uncovereth his near
kin they shall bear their iniquity.
and if a man shall lie with his uncle s wife he hath
uncovered his uncle s nakedness they shall bear their Sin
they shall die childless.
and if a man shall take his brother s wife it is an unclean
thing he hath uncovered his brother s nakedness they shall
be childless.
ye shall therefore keep all my statutes and all my judgments
and do them that the land whither I bring you to dwell
therein spue you not out.
and ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation which I
cast out before you for they committed all these things and
therefore I abhorred them.
but I have said unto you ye shall inherit their land and I
will give it unto you to possess it a land that floweth with
milk and honey I Am the lord your God which have separated
you from other people.
ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and
unclean and between unclean fowls and clean and ye shall not
make your souls abominable by beast or by fowl or by any
manner of living thing that creepeth on the ground which I
have separated from you as unclean.
and ye shall be holy unto me for I the lord Am holy and have
severed you from other people that ye should be mine.
a man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit or that is a
wizard shall surely be put to death they shall stone them
with stones their blood shall be upon them.
and the lord said unto Moses speak unto the priests the sons
of Aaron and say unto them there shall none be defiled for
the dead among his people
but for his kin that is near unto him that is for his
mother and for his father and for his son and for his
daughter and for his brother.
and for his sister a virgin that is nigh unto him which hath
had no husband for her may he be defiled.
but he shall not defile himself being a chief man among his
people to profane himself.
they shall not make baldness upon their head Neither shall
they shave off the corner of their beard nor make any
cuttings in their flesh.
they shall be holy unto their God and not profane the name of
their God for the offerings of the lord made by fire and the
bread of their God they do offer therefore they shall be
holy.
they shall not take a wife that is a whore or profane
Neither shall they take a woman put away from her husband for
he is holy unto his God.
thou shalt sanctify him therefore for he offereth the bread
of thy God he shall be holy unto thee for I the lord which
sanctify you Am holy.
and the daughter of any priest if she profane herself by
playing the whore she profaneth her father she shall be
burnt with fire.
and he that is the high priest among his brethren upon whose
head the anointing oil was poured and that is consecrated to
put on the garments shall not uncover his head nor rend his
clothes
Neither shall he go in to any dead body nor defile himself
for his father or for his mother
Neither shall he go out of the sanctuary nor profane the
sanctuary of his God for the crown of the anointing oil of
his God is upon him I Am the lord.
and he shall take a wife in her virginity.
a widow or a divorced woman or profane or an harlot these
shall he not take but he shall take a virgin of his own
people to wife.
Neither shall he profane his seed among his people for I the
lord do sanctify him.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto Aaron saying whosoever he be of thy seed in their
generations that hath any blemish let him not approach to
offer the bread of his God.
for whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish he shall not
approach a blind man or a lame or he that hath a flat nose
or any thing superfluous
or a man that is brokenfooted or brokenhanded
or crookbackt or a dwarf or that hath a blemish in his eye
or be scurvy or scabbed or hath his stones broken
no man that hath a blemish of the seed of Aaron the priest
shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the lord made by
fire he hath a blemish he shall not come nigh to offer the
bread of his God.
he shall eat the bread of his God both of the most holy and
of the holy.
only he shall not go in unto the vail nor come nigh unto the
altar because he hath a blemish that he profane not my
sanctuaries for I the lord do sanctify them.
and Moses told it unto Aaron and to his sons and unto all
the children of Israel.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto Aaron and to his sons that they separate
themselves from the holy things of the children of Israel and
that they profane not my holy name in those things which they
hallow unto me I Am the lord.
say unto them whosoever he be of all your seed among your
generations that goeth unto the holy things which the
children of Israel hallow unto the lord having his
uncleanness upon him that soul shall be cut off from my
presence I Am the lord.
what man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper or hath a
running issue he shall not eat of the holy things until he
be clean. and whoso toucheth any thing that is unclean by the
dead or a man whose seed goeth from him
or whosoever toucheth any creeping thing whereby he may be
made unclean or a man of whom he may take uncleanness
whatsoever uncleanness he hath
the soul which hath touched any such shall be unclean until
even and shall not eat of the holy things unless he wash his
flesh with water.
and when the sun is down he shall be clean and shall
afterward eat of the holy things because it is his food.
that which dieth of itself or is torn with beasts he shall
not eat to defile himself therewith I Am the lord.
they shall therefore keep mine ordinance lest they bear Sin
for it and die therefore if they profane it I the lord do
sanctify them.
there shall no stranger eat of the holy thing a sojourner of
the priest or an hired servant shall not eat of the holy
thing.
but if the priest buy any soul with his money he shall eat of
it and he that is born in his house they shall eat of his
meat.
if the priest s daughter also be married unto a stranger she
may not eat of an offering of the holy things.
but if the priest s daughter be a widow or divorced and have
no child and is returned unto her father s house as in her
youth she shall eat of her father s meat but there shall be
no stranger eat thereof.
and if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly then he shall
put the fifth part thereof unto it and shall give it unto the
priest with the holy thing.
and they shall not profane the holy things of the children of
Israel which they offer unto the lord
or suffer them to bear the iniquity of trespass when they eat
their holy things for I the lord do sanctify them.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto Aaron and to his sons and unto all the children
of Israel and say unto them whatsoever he be of the house of
Israel or of the strangers in Israel that will offer his
oblation for all his vows and for all his freewill offerings
which they will offer unto the lord for a burnt offering
ye shall offer at your own will a Male without blemish of the
beeves of the sheep or of the goats.
but whatsoever hath a blemish that shall ye not offer for it
shall not be acceptable for you.
and whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the
lord to accomplish his vow or a freewill offering in beeves
or sheep it shall be perfect to be accepted there shall be
no blemish therein.
blind or broken or maimed or having a wen or scurvy or
scabbed ye shall not offer these unto the lord nor make an
offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the lord.
either a bullock or a lamb that hath any thing superfluous or
lacking in his parts that mayest thou offer for a freewill
offering but for a vow it shall not be accepted.
ye shall not offer unto the lord that which is bruised or
crushed or broken or cut Neither shall ye make any offering
thereof in your land.
Neither from a stranger s hand shall ye offer the bread of
your God of any of these because their corruption is in them
and blemishes be in them they shall not be accepted for you.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
when a bullock or a sheep or a goat is brought forth then
it shall be seven days under the dam and from the eighth day
and thenceforth it shall be accepted for an offering made by
fire unto the lord.
and whether it be cow or ewe ye shall not kill it and her
young both in one day.
and when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the
lord offer it at your own will.
on the same day it shall be eaten up ye shall leave none of
it until the morrow I Am the lord.
therefore shall ye keep my commandments and do them I Am the
lord.
Neither shall ye profane my holy name but I will be hallowed
among the children of Israel I Am the lord which hallow you
that brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God I
Am the lord.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them
concerning the feasts of the lord which ye shall proclaim to
be holy convocations even these are my feasts.
six days shall work be done but the seventh day is the
sabbath of rest an holy convocation ye shall do no work
therein it is the sabbath of the lord in all your dwellings.
these are the feasts of the lord even holy convocations
which ye shall proclaim in their seasons.
in the fourteenth day of the first month at even is the lord s
passover.
and on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of
unleavened bread unto the lord seven days ye must eat
unleavened bread.
in the first day ye shall have an holy convocation ye shall
do no servile work therein.
but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the lord
seven days in the seventh day is an holy convocation ye
shall do no servile work therein.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them when ye
be come into the land which I give unto you and shall reap
the harvest thereof then ye shall bring a sheaf of the
firstfruits of your harvest unto the priest
and he shall wave the sheaf before the lord to be accepted
for you on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall wave
it.
and ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb
without blemish of the first year for a burnt offering unto
the lord.
and the meat offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine
flour mingled with oil an offering made by fire unto the lord
for a sweet savour and the drink offering thereof shall be of
wine the fourth part of an hin.
and ye shall eat Neither bread nor parched corn nor green
ears until the selfsame day that ye have brought an offering
unto your God it shall be a statute for ever throughout your
generations in all your dwellings.
and ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath
from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering
seven sabbaths shall be complete
even unto the morrow after the seventh sabbath shall ye number
fifty days and ye shall offer a new meat offering unto the
lord.
ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two
tenth deals they shall be of fine flour they shall be baken
with leaven they are the firstfruits unto the lord.
and ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish
of the first year and one young bullock and two rams they
shall be for a burnt offering unto the lord with their meat
offering and their drink offerings even an offering made by
fire of sweet savour unto the lord.
then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a Sin
offering and two lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of
peace offerings.
and the priest shall wave them with the bread of the
firstfruits for a wave offering before the lord with the two
lambs they shall be holy to the lord for the priest.
and ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day that it may be an
holy convocation unto you ye shall do no servile work
therein it shall be a statute for ever in all your dwellings
throughout your generations.
and when ye reap the harvest of your land thou shalt not make
clean riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest
Neither shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest thou
shalt leave them unto the poor and to the stranger I Am the
lord your God.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel saying in the seventh
month in the first day of the month shall ye have a sabbath
a memorial of blowing of trumpets an holy convocation.
ye shall do no servile work therein but ye shall offer an
offering made by fire unto the lord.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
also on the tenth day of this seventh month there shall be a
day of atonement it shall be an holy convocation unto you
and ye shall afflict your souls and offer an offering made by
fire unto the lord.
and ye shall do no work in that same day for it is a day of
atonement to make an atonement for you before the lord your
God.
for whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that
same day he shall be cut off from among his people.
and whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same
day the same soul will I destroy from among his people.
ye shall do no manner of work it shall be a statute for ever
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
it shall be unto you a sabbath of rest and ye shall afflict
your souls in the ninth day of the month at even from even
unto even shall ye celebrate your sabbath.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel saying the fifteenth day
of this seventh month shall be the feast of tabernacles for
seven days unto the lord.
on the first day shall be an holy convocation ye shall do no
servile work therein.
seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the
lord on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you
and ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the lord it
is a solemn assembly and ye shall do no servile work therein.
these are the feasts of the lord which ye shall proclaim to
be holy convocations to offer an offering made by fire unto
the lord a burnt offering and a meat offering a sacrifice
and drink offerings every thing upon his day
beside the sabbaths of the lord and beside your gifts and
beside all your vows and beside all your freewill offerings
which ye give unto the lord.
also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month when ye have
gathered in the fruit of the land ye shall keep a feast unto
the lord seven days on the first day shall be a sabbath and
on the eighth day shall be a sabbath.
and ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly
trees branches of palm trees and the boughs of thick trees
and willows of the brook and ye shall rejoice before the lord
your God seven days.
and ye shall keep it a feast unto the lord seven days in the
year. it shall be a statute for ever in your generations ye
shall celebrate it in the seventh month.
ye shall dwell in booths seven days all that are Israelites
born shall dwell in booths
that your generations may know that I made the children of
Israel to dwell in booths when I brought them out of the land
of Egypt I Am the lord your God.
and Moses declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of
the lord.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
command the children of Israel that they bring unto thee pure
oil olive beaten for the light to cause the lamps to burn
continually.
without the vail of the testimony in the tabernacle of the
congregation shall Aaron order it from the evening unto the
morning before the lord continually it shall be a statute for
ever in your generations.
he shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the
lord continually.
and thou shalt take fine flour and bake twelve cakes thereof
two tenth deals shall be in one cake.
and thou shalt set them in two rows six on a row upon the
pure table before the lord.
and thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row that it
may be on the bread for a memorial even an offering made by
fire unto the lord.
every sabbath he shall set it in order before the lord
continually being taken from the children of Israel by an
everlasting covenant.
and it shall be Aaron s and his sons and they shall eat it
in the holy place for it is most holy unto him of the
offerings of the lord made by fire by a perpetual statute.
and the son of an Israelitish woman whose father was an
Egyptian went out among the children of Israel and this son
of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together
in the camp
and the Israelitish woman s son blasphemed the name of the
lord and cursed. and they brought him unto Moses and his
mother s name was Shelomith the daughter of Dibri of the
tribe of Dan
and they put him in ward that the mind of the lord might be
shewed them.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp and let all
that heard him lay their hands upon his head and let all the
congregation stone him.
and thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel saying
whosoever curseth his God shall bear his Sin.
and he that blasphemeth the name of the lord he shall surely
be put to death and all the congregation shall certainly
stone him as well the stranger as he that is born in the
land when he blasphemeth the name of the lord shall be put
to death.
and he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.
and he that killeth a beast shall make it good beast for
beast.
and if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour as he hath
done so shall it be done to him
breach for breach eye for eye tooth for tooth as he hath
caused a blemish in a man so shall it be done to him again.
and he that killeth a beast he shall restore it and he that
killeth a man he shall be put to death.
ye shall have one manner of law as well for the stranger as
for one of your own country for I Am the lord your God.
and Moses spake to the children of Israel that they should
bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp and stone him
with stones. and the children of Israel did as the lord
commanded Moses.
and the lord spake unto Moses in mount Sinai saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them when ye
come into the land which I give you then shall the land keep
a sabbath unto the lord.
six years thou shalt sow thy field and six years thou shalt
prune thy vineyard and gather in the fruit thereof
but in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the
land a sabbath for the lord thou shalt Neither sow thy
field nor prune thy vineyard.
that which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest thou shalt
not reap Neither gather the grapes of thy vine undressed for
it is a year of rest unto the land.
and the sabbath of the land shall be meat for you for thee
and for thy servant and for thy maid and for thy hired
servant and for thy stranger that sojourneth with thee.
and for thy cattle and for the beast that are in thy land
shall all the increase thereof be meat.
and thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee seven
times seven years and the space of the seven sabbaths of
years shall be unto thee forty and nine years.
then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on
the tenth day of the seventh month in the day of atonement
shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land.
and ye shall hallow the fiftieth year and proclaim liberty
throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof it
shall be a jubile unto you and ye shall return every man unto
his possession and ye shall return every man unto his family.
a jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you ye shall not
sow Neither reap that which groweth of itself in it nor
gather the grapes in it of thy vine undressed.
for it is the jubile it shall be holy unto you ye shall eat
the increase thereof out of the field.
in the year of this jubile ye shall return every man unto his
possession.
and if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour or buyest ought of
thy neighbour s hand ye shall not oppress one another
according to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt
buy of thy neighbour and according unto the number of years
of the fruits he shall sell unto thee
according to the multitude of years thou shalt increase the
price thereof and according to the fewness of years thou
shalt diminish the price of it for according to the number of
the years of the fruits doth he sell unto thee.
ye shall not therefore oppress one another but thou shalt
fear thy God for I Am the lord your God.
wherefore ye shall do my statutes and keep my judgments and
do them and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.
and the land shall yield her fruit and ye shall eat your
fill and dwell therein in safety.
and if ye shall say what shall we eat the seventh year?
behold we shall not sow nor gather in our increase
then I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year
and it shall bring forth fruit for three years.
and ye shall sow the eighth year and eat yet of old fruit
until the ninth year until her fruits come in ye shall eat of
the old store.
the land shall not be sold for ever for the land is mine for
ye are strangers and sojourners with me.
and in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a
redemption for the land.
if thy brother be waxen poor and hath sold away some of his
possession and if any of his kin come to redeem it then
shall he redeem that which his brother sold.
and if the man have none to redeem it and himself be able to
redeem it
then let him count the years of the sale thereof and restore
the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it that he may
return unto his possession.
but if he be not able to restore it to him then that which is
sold shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until
the year of jubile and in the jubile it shall go out and he
shall return unto his possession.
and if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled city then he
may redeem it within a whole year after it is sold within a
full year may he redeem it.
and if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year
then the house that is in the walled city shall be established
for ever to him that bought it throughout his generations it
shall not go out in the jubile.
but the houses of the villages which have no wall round about
them shall be counted as the fields of the country they may
be redeemed and they shall go out in the jubile.
notwithstanding the cities of the Levites and the houses of
the cities of their possession may the Levites redeem at any
time.
and if a man purchase of the Levites then the house that was
sold and the city of his possession shall go out in the year
of jubile for the houses of the cities of the Levites are
their possession among the children of Israel.
but the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold
for it is their perpetual possession.
and if thy brother be waxen poor and fallen in decay with
thee then thou shalt relieve him yea though he be a
stranger or a sojourner that he may live with thee.
take thou no usury of him or increase but fear thy God that
thy brother may live with thee.
thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury nor lend him thy
victuals for increase.
I Am the lord your God which brought you forth out of the
land of Egypt to give you the land of Canaan and to be your
God.
and if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor and be
sold unto thee thou shalt not compel him to serve as a
bondservant
but as an hired servant and as a sojourner he shall be with
thee and shall serve thee unto the year of jubile.
and then shall he depart from thee both he and his children
with him and shall return unto his own family and unto the
possession of his fathers shall he return.
for they are my servants which I brought forth out of the
land of Egypt they shall not be sold as bondmen.
thou shalt not rule over him with rigour but shalt fear thy
God.
both thy bondmen and thy bondmaids which thou shalt have
shall be of the heathen that are round about you of them
shall ye buy bondmen and bondmaids.
moreover of the children of the strangers that do Sojourn
among you of them shall ye buy and of their families that
are with you which they begat in your land and they shall be
your possession.
and ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children
after you to inherit them for a possession they shall be
your bondmen for ever but over your brethren the children of
Israel ye shall not rule one over another with rigour.
and if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee and thy
brother that dwelleth by him wax poor and sell himself unto
the stranger or sojourner by thee or to the stock of the
stranger s family
after that he is sold he may be redeemed again one of his
brethren may redeem him
either his uncle or his uncle s son may redeem him or any
that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem him or
if he be able he may redeem himself.
and he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year
that he was sold to him unto the year of jubile and the price
of his sale shall be according unto the number of years
according to the time of an hired servant shall it be with
him.
if there be yet many years behind according unto them he
shall give again the price of his redemption out of the money
that he was bought for.
and if there remain but few years unto the year of jubile
then he shall count with him and according unto his years
shall he give him again the price of his redemption.
and as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him and the
other shall not rule with rigour over him in thy sight.
and if he be not redeemed in these years then he shall go out
in the year of jubile both he and his children with him.
for unto me the children of Israel are servants they are my
servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt I Am
the lord your God.
ye shall make you no idols nor graven image Neither rear you
up a standing image Neither shall ye set up any image of
stone in your land to bow down unto it for I Am the lord
your God.
ye shall keep my sabbaths and reverence my sanctuary I Am
the lord.
if ye walk in my statutes and keep my commandments and do
them
then I will give you rain in due season and the land shall
yield her increase and the trees of the field shall yield
their fruit.
and your threshing shall reach unto the vintage and the
vintage shall reach unto the sowing time and ye shall eat
your bread to the full and dwell in your land safely.
and I will give peace in the land and ye shall lie down and
none shall make you afraid and I will rid evil beasts out of
the land Neither shall the sword go through your land.
and ye shall chase your enemies and they shall fall before
you by the sword.
and five of you shall chase an hundred and an hundred of you
shall put Ten thousand to flight and your enemies shall fall
before you by the sword.
for I will have respect unto you and make you fruitful and
multiply you and establish my covenant with you.
and ye shall eat old store and bring forth the old because of
the new.
and I set my tabernacle among you and my soul shall not abhor
you.
and I will walk among you and will be your God and ye shall
be my people.
I Am the lord your God which brought you forth out of the
land of Egypt that ye should not be their bondmen and I have
broken the Bands of your yoke and made you go upright.
but if ye will not hearken unto me and will not do all these
commandments
and if ye shall despise my statutes or if your soul abhor my
judgments so that ye will not do all my commandments but
that ye break my covenant
I also will do this unto you I will even appoint over you
terror consumption and the burning ague that shall consume
the eyes and cause sorrow of heart and ye shall sow your
seed in vain for your enemies shall eat it.
and I will set my face against you and ye shall be slain
before your enemies they that hate you shall reign over you
and ye shall flee when none pursueth you.
and if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me then I
will punish you seven times more for your sins.
and I will break the pride of your power and I will make your
heaven as Iron and your earth as brass
and your strength shall be spent in vain for your land shall
not yield her increase Neither shall the trees of the land
yield their fruits.
and if ye walk contrary unto me and will not hearken unto me
I will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to
your sins.
I will also send wild beasts among you which shall rob you of
your children and destroy your cattle and make you few in
number and your high ways shall be desolate.
and if ye will not be reformed by me by these things but will
walk contrary unto me
then will I also walk contrary unto you and will punish you
yet seven times for your sins.
and I will bring a sword upon you that shall avenge the
quarrel of my covenant and when ye are gathered together
within your cities I will send the pestilence among you and
ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy.
and when I have broken the staff of your bread Ten women
shall bake your bread in one oven and they shall deliver you
your bread again by weight and ye shall eat and not be
satisfied.
and if ye will not for all this hearken unto me but walk
contrary unto me
then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury and I even
I will chastise you seven times for your sins.
and ye shall eat the flesh of your sons and the flesh of your
daughters shall ye eat.
and I will destroy your high places and cut down your images
and cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols and my
soul shall abhor you.
and I will make your cities waste and bring your sanctuaries
unto desolation and I will not smell the savour of your sweet
odours.
and I will bring the land into desolation and your enemies
which dwell therein shall be astonished at it.
and I will scatter you among the heathen and will draw out a
sword after you and your land shall be desolate and your
cities waste.
then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths as long as it lieth
desolate and ye be in your enemies land even then shall the
land rest and enjoy her sabbaths.
as long as it lieth desolate it shall rest because it did not
rest in your sabbaths when ye dwelt upon it.
and upon them that are left alive of you I will send a
faintness into their hearts in the lands of their enemies and
the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them and they shall
flee as fleeing from a sword and they shall fall when none
pursueth.
and they shall fall one upon another as it were before a
sword when none pursueth and ye shall have no power to stand
before your enemies.
and ye shall perish among the heathen and the land of your
enemies shall eat you up.
and they that are left of you shall pine away in their
iniquity in your enemies lands and also in the iniquities of
their fathers shall they pine away with them.
if they shall confess their iniquity and the iniquity of
their fathers with their trespass which they trespassed
against me and that also they have walked contrary unto me
and that I also have walked contrary unto them and have
brought them into the land of their enemies if then their
uncircumcised hearts be humbled and they then accept of the
punishment of their iniquity
then will I remember my covenant with Jacob and also my
covenant with Isaac and also my covenant with Abraham will I
remember and I will remember the land.
the land also shall be left of them and shall enjoy her
sabbaths while she lieth desolate without them and they
shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity because
even because they despised my judgments and because their
soul abhorred my statutes.
and yet for all that when they be in the land of their
enemies I will not cast them away Neither will I abhor them
to destroy them utterly and to break my covenant with them
for I Am the lord their God.
but I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their
ancestors whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in
the sight of the heathen that I might be their God I Am the
lord.
these are the statutes and judgments and laws which the lord
made between him and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by
the hand of Moses.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them when a
man shall make a singular vow the persons shall be for the
lord by thy estimation.
and thy estimation shall be of the Male from twenty years old
even unto sixty years old even thy estimation shall be fifty
shekels of Silver after the shekel of the sanctuary.
and if it be a female then thy estimation shall be thirty
shekels.
and if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old
then thy estimation shall be of the Male twenty shekels and
for the female Ten shekels.
and if it be from a month old even unto five years old then
thy estimation shall be of the Male five shekels of Silver
and for the female thy estimation shall be three shekels of
Silver.
and if it be from sixty years old and above if it be a Male
then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels and for the
female Ten shekels.
but if he be poorer than thy estimation then he shall present
himself before the priest and the priest shall value him
according to his ability that vowed shall the priest value
him.
and if it be a beast whereof men bring an offering unto the
lord all that any man giveth of such unto the lord shall be
holy.
he shall not alter it nor change it a good for a bad or a
bad for a good and if he shall at all change beast for beast
then it and the exchange thereof shall be holy.
and if it be any unclean beast of which they do not offer a
sacrifice unto the lord then he shall present the beast
before the priest
and the priest shall value it whether it be good or bad as
thou valuest it who art the priest so shall it be.
but if he will at all redeem it then he shall add a fifth
part thereof unto thy estimation.
and when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy unto the
lord then the priest shall estimate it whether it be good or
bad as the priest shall estimate it so shall it stand.
and if he that sanctified it will redeem his house then he
shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto
it and it shall be his.
and if a man shall sanctify unto the lord some part of a field
of his possession then thy estimation shall be according to
the seed thereof an homer of barley seed shall be valued at
fifty shekels of Silver.
if he sanctify his field from the year of jubile according to
thy estimation it shall stand.
but if he sanctify his field after the jubile then the priest
shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that
remain even unto the year of the jubile and it shall be
abated from thy estimation.
and if he that sanctified the field will in any wise redeem
it then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy
estimation unto it and it shall be assured to him.
and if he will not redeem the field or if he have sold the
field to another man it shall not be redeemed any more.
but the field when it goeth out in the jubile shall be holy
unto the lord as a field devoted the possession thereof
shall be the priest s.
and if a man sanctify unto the lord a field which he hath
bought which is not of the fields of his possession
then the priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy
estimation even unto the year of the jubile and he shall
give thine estimation in that day as a holy thing unto the
lord.
in the year of the jubile the field shall return unto him of
whom it was bought even to him to whom the possession of the
land did belong.
and all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of
the sanctuary twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.
only the firstling of the beasts which should be the lord s
firstling no man shall sanctify it whether it be ox or
sheep it is the lord s.
and if it be of an unclean beast then he shall redeem it
according to thine estimation and shall add a fifth part of
it thereto or if it be not redeemed then it shall be sold
according to thy estimation.
notwithstanding no devoted thing that a man shall devote unto
the lord of all that he hath both of man and beast and of
the field of his possession shall be sold or redeemed every
devoted thing is most holy unto the lord.
none devoted which shall be devoted of men shall be
redeemed but shall surely be put to death.
and all the tithe of the land whether of the seed of the
land or of the fruit of the tree is the lord s it is holy
unto the lord.
and if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes he shall
add thereto the fifth part thereof.
and concerning the tithe of the herd or of the flock even of
whatsoever passeth under the rod the tenth shall be holy unto
the lord.
he shall not search whether it be good or bad Neither shall
he change it and if he change it at all then both it and the
change thereof shall be holy it shall not be redeemed.
these are the commandments which the lord commanded Moses for
the children of Israel in mount Sinai.
and the lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai in
the tabernacle of the congregation on the first day of the
second month in the second year after they were come out of
the land of Egypt saying
take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of
Israel after their families by the house of their fathers
with the number of their names every Male by their polls
from twenty years old and upward all that are able to go
forth to war in Israel thou and Aaron shall number them by
their armies.
and with you there shall be a man of every tribe every one
head of the house of his fathers.
and these are the names of the men that shall stand with you
of the tribe of Reuben Elizur the son of Shedeur.
of Simeon Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
of Judah Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
of Issachar Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
of Zebulun Eliab the son of Helon.
of the children of Joseph of Ephraim Elishama the son of
Ammihud of Manasseh Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
of Benjamin Abidan the son of Gideoni.
of Dan Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
of Asher Pagiel the son of Ocran.
of Gad Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
of Naphtali Ahira the son of Enan.
these were the renowned of the congregation princes of the
tribes of their fathers heads of thousands in Israel.
and Moses and Aaron took these men which are expressed by
their names
and they assembled all the congregation together on the first
day of the second month and they declared their pedigrees
after their families by the house of their fathers according
to the number of the names from twenty years old and upward
by their polls.
as the lord commanded Moses so he numbered them in the
wilderness of Sinai.
and the children of Reuben Israel s eldest son by their
generations after their families by the house of their
fathers according to the number of the names by their polls
every Male from twenty years old and upward all that were
able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of Reuben
were forty and six thousand and five hundred.
of the children of Simeon by their generations after their
families by the house of their fathers those that were
numbered of them according to the number of the names by
their polls every Male from twenty years old and upward all
that were able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of Simeon
were fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.
of the children of Gad by their generations after their
families by the house of their fathers according to the
number of the names from twenty years old and upward all
that were able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of Gad
were forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty.
of the children of Judah by their generations after their
families by the house of their fathers according to the
number of the names from twenty years old and upward all
that were able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of Judah
were threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.
of the children of Issachar by their generations after their
families by the house of their fathers according to the
number of the names from twenty years old and upward all
that were able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of
Issachar were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.
of the children of Zebulun by their generations after their
families by the house of their fathers according to the
number of the names from twenty years old and upward all
that were able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of
Zebulun were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.
of the children of Joseph namely of the children of Ephraim
by their generations after their families by the house of
their fathers according to the number of the names from
twenty years old and upward all that were able to go forth to
war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of
Ephraim were forty thousand and five hundred.
of the children of Manasseh by their generations after their
families by the house of their fathers according to the
number of the names from twenty years old and upward all
that were able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of
Manasseh were thirty and two thousand and two hundred.
of the children of Benjamin by their generations after their
families by the house of their fathers according to the
number of the names from twenty years old and upward all
that were able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of
Benjamin were thirty and five thousand and four hundred.
of the children of Dan by their generations after their
families by the house of their fathers according to the
number of the names from twenty years old and upward all
that were able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of Dan
were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.
of the children of Asher by their generations after their
families by the house of their fathers according to the
number of the names from twenty years old and upward all
that were able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of Asher
were forty and one thousand and five hundred.
of the children of Naphtali throughout their generations
after their families by the house of their fathers according
to the number of the names from twenty years old and upward
all that were able to go forth to war
those that were numbered of them even of the tribe of
Naphtali were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.
these are those that were numbered which Moses and Aaron
numbered and the princes of Israel being twelve men each
one was for the house of his fathers.
so were all those that were numbered of the children of
Israel by the house of their fathers from twenty years old
and upward all that were able to go forth to war in Israel
even all they that were numbered were six hundred thousand and
three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
but the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not
numbered among them.
for the lord had spoken unto Moses saying
only thou shalt not number the tribe of Levi Neither take the
sum of them among the children of Israel
but thou shalt appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of
testimony and over all the vessels thereof and over all
things that belong to it they shall bear the tabernacle and
all the vessels thereof and they shall minister unto it and
shall encamp round about the tabernacle.
and when the tabernacle setteth forward the Levites shall
take it down and when the tabernacle is to be pitched the
Levites shall set it up and the stranger that cometh nigh
shall be put to death.
and the children of Israel shall pitch their tents every man
by his own camp and every man by his own standard throughout
their hosts.
but the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of
testimony that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the
children of Israel and the Levites shall keep the charge of
the tabernacle of testimony.
and the children of Israel did according to all that the lord
commanded Moses so did they.
and the lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying
every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own
standard with the ensign of their father s house far off
about the tabernacle of the congregation shall they pitch.
and on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they
of the standard of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their
armies and Nahshon the son of Amminadab shall be captain of
the children of Judah.
and his host and those that were numbered of them were
threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.
and those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of
Issachar and Nethaneel the son of Zuar shall be captain of
the children of Issachar.
and his host and those that were numbered thereof were fifty
and four thousand and four hundred.
then the tribe of Zebulun and Eliab the son of Helon shall be
captain of the children of Zebulun.
and his host and those that were numbered thereof were fifty
and seven thousand and four hundred.
all that were numbered in the camp of Judah were an hundred
thousand and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four
hundred throughout their armies. these shall first set forth.
on the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben
according to their armies and the captain of the children of
Reuben shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur.
and his host and those that were numbered thereof were forty
and six thousand and five hundred.
and those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of Simeon and
the captain of the children of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the
son of Zurishaddai.
and his host and those that were numbered of them were fifty
and nine thousand and three hundred.
then the tribe of Gad and the captain of the sons of Gad
shall be Eliasaph the son of Reuel.
and his host and those that were numbered of them were forty
and five thousand and six hundred and fifty.
all that were numbered in the camp of Reuben were an hundred
thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and
fifty throughout their armies. and they shall set forth in
the second rank.
then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with
the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp as they
encamp so shall they set forward every man in his place by
their standards.
on the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim
according to their armies and the captain of the sons of
Ephraim shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud.
and his host and those that were numbered of them were forty
thousand and five hundred.
and by him shall be the tribe of Manasseh and the captain of
the children of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of
Pedahzur.
and his host and those that were numbered of them were
thirty and two thousand and two hundred.
then the tribe of Benjamin and the captain of the sons of
Benjamin shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni.
and his host and those that were numbered of them were
thirty and five thousand and four hundred.
all that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were an hundred
thousand and eight thousand and an hundred throughout their
armies. and they shall go forward in the third rank.
the standard of the camp of Dan shall be on the north side by
their armies and the captain of the children of Dan shall be
Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
and his host and those that were numbered of them were
threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.
and those that encamp by him shall be the tribe of Asher and
the captain of the children of Asher shall be Pagiel the son
of Ocran.
and his host and those that were numbered of them were forty
and one thousand and five hundred.
then the tribe of Naphtali and the captain of the children of
Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan.
and his host and those that were numbered of them were fifty
and three thousand and four hundred.
all they that were numbered in the camp of Dan were an hundred
thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. they
shall go hindmost with their standards.
these are those which were numbered of the children of Israel
by the house of their fathers all those that were numbered of
the camps throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and
three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
but the Levites were not numbered among the children of
Israel as the lord commanded Moses.
and the children of Israel did according to all that the lord
commanded Moses so they pitched by their standards and so
they set forward every one after their families according to
the house of their fathers.
these also are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day
that the lord spake with Moses in mount Sinai.
and these are the names of the sons of Aaron Nadab the
firstborn and Abihu Eleazar and Ithamar.
these are the names of the sons of Aaron the priests which
were anointed whom he consecrated to minister in the priest s
office.
and Nadab and Abihu died before the lord when they offered
strange fire before the lord in the wilderness of Sinai and
they had no children and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in
the priest s office in the sight of Aaron their father.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
bring the tribe of Levi near and present them before Aaron
the priest that they may minister unto him.
and they shall keep his charge and the charge of the whole
congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation to do
the service of the tabernacle.
and they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of
the congregation and the charge of the children of Israel to
do the service of the tabernacle.
and thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons
they are wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel.
and thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons and they shall wait
on their priest s office and the stranger that cometh nigh
shall be put to death.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
and I behold I have taken the Levites from among the
children of Israel instead of all the firstborn that openeth
the matrix among the children of Israel therefore the Levites
shall be mine
because all the firstborn are mine for on the day that I
smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto
me all the firstborn in Israel both man and beast mine shall
they be I Am the lord.
and the lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai
saying
number the children of Levi after the house of their fathers
by their families every Male from a month old and upward
shalt thou number them.
and Moses numbered them according to the word of the lord as
he was commanded.
and these were the sons of Levi by their names Gershon and
Kohath and Merari.
and these are the names of the sons of Gershon by their
families Libni and Shimei.
and the sons of Kohath by their families Amram and Izehar
Hebron and Uzziel.
and the sons of Merari by their families Mahli and Mushi.
these are the families of the Levites according to the house
of their fathers.
of Gershon was the family of the Libnites and the family of
the Shimites these are the families of the Gershonites.
those that were numbered of them according to the number of
all the males from a month old and upward even those that
were numbered of them were seven thousand and five hundred.
the families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the
tabernacle westward.
and the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites
shall be Eliasaph the son of Lael.
and the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the
congregation shall be the tabernacle and the tent the
covering thereof and the hanging for the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation
and the hangings of the court and the curtain for the door of
the court which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round
about and the cords of it for all the service thereof.
and of Kohath was the family of the Amramites and the family
of the Izeharites and the family of the Hebronites and the
family of the Uzzielites these are the families of the
Kohathites.
in the number of all the males from a month old and upward
were eight thousand and six hundred keeping the charge of the
sanctuary.
the families of the sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of
the tabernacle southward.
and the chief of the house of the father of the families of
the Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel.
and their charge shall be the ark and the table and the
candlestick and the altars and the vessels of the sanctuary
wherewith they minister and the hanging and all the service
thereof.
and Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be chief over
the chief of the Levites and have the oversight of them that
keep the charge of the sanctuary.
of Merari was the family of the Mahlites and the family of
the Mushites these are the families of Merari.
and those that were numbered of them according to the number
of all the males from a month old and upward were six
thousand and two hundred.
and the chief of the house of the father of the families of
Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail these shall pitch on the
side of the tabernacle northward.
and under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall
be the boards of the tabernacle and the bars thereof and the
pillars thereof and the sockets thereof and all the vessels
thereof and all that serveth thereto
and the pillars of the court round about and their sockets
and their pins and their cords.
but those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east
even before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward shall
be Moses and Aaron and his sons keeping the charge of the
sanctuary for the charge of the children of Israel and the
stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.
all that were numbered of the Levites which Moses and Aaron
numbered at the commandment of the lord throughout their
families all the males from a month old and upward were
twenty and two thousand.
and the lord said unto Moses number all the firstborn of the
males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward
and take the number of their names.
and thou shalt take the Levites for me I Am the lord instead
of all the firstborn among the children of Israel and the
cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings among the
cattle of the children of Israel.
and Moses numbered as the lord commanded him all the
firstborn among the children of Israel.
and all the firstborn males by the number of names from a
month old and upward of those that were numbered of them
were twenty and two thousand two hundred and threescore and
thirteen.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the
children of Israel and the cattle of the Levites instead of
their cattle and the Levites shall be mine I Am the lord.
and for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and
threescore and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of
Israel which are more than the Levites
thou shalt even take five shekels apiece by the poll after
the shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take them the shekel
is twenty gerahs
and thou shalt give the money wherewith the odd number of
them is to be redeemed unto Aaron and to his sons.
and Moses took the redemption money of them that were over and
above them that were redeemed by the Levites
of the firstborn of the children of Israel took he the money
a thousand three hundred and threescore and five shekels
after the shekel of the sanctuary
and Moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto Aaron
and to his sons according to the word of the lord as the
lord commanded Moses.
and the lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying
take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of
Levi after their families by the house of their fathers
from thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old
all that enter into the host to do the work in the tabernacle
of the congregation.
this shall be the service of the sons of Kohath in the
tabernacle of the congregation about the most holy things
and when the camp setteth forward Aaron shall come and his
sons and they shall take down the covering vail and cover
the ark of testimony with it
and shall put thereon the covering of badgers skins and
shall spread over it a cloth wholly of blue and shall put in
the staves thereof.
and upon the table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of
blue and put thereon the dishes and the spoons and the
bowls and covers to cover withal and the continual bread
shall be thereon
and they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet and cover
the same with a covering of badgers skins and shall put in
the staves thereof.
and they shall take a cloth of blue and cover the candlestick
of the light and his lamps and his tongs and his
snuffdishes and all the oil vessels thereof wherewith they
minister unto it
and they shall put it and all the vessels thereof within a
covering of badgers skins and shall put it upon a bar.
and upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue
and cover it with a covering of badgers skins and shall put
to the staves thereof
and they shall take all the instruments of ministry wherewith
they minister in the sanctuary and put them in a cloth of
blue and cover them with a covering of badgers skins and
shall put them on a bar
and they shall take away the ashes from the altar and spread
a purple cloth thereon
and they shall put upon it all the vessels thereof wherewith
they minister about it even the censers the fleshhooks and
the shovels and the basons all the vessels of the altar and
they shall spread upon it a covering of badgers skins and
put to the staves of it.
and when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the
sanctuary and all the vessels of the sanctuary as the camp
is to set forward after that the sons of Kohath shall come
to bear it but they shall not touch any holy thing lest they
die. these things are the burden of the sons of Kohath in the
tabernacle of the congregation.
and to the office of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest
pertaineth the oil for the light and the sweet incense and
the daily meat offering and the anointing oil and the
oversight of all the tabernacle and of all that therein is
in the sanctuary and in the vessels thereof.
and the lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying
cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites
from among the Levites
but thus do unto them that they may live and not die when
they approach unto the most holy things Aaron and his sons
shall go in and appoint them every one to his service and to
his burden
but they shall not go in to see when the holy things are
covered lest they die.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
take also the sum of the sons of Gershon throughout the
houses of their fathers by their families
from thirty years old and upward until fifty years old shalt
thou number them all that enter in to perform the service to
do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.
this is the service of the families of the Gershonites to
serve and for burdens
and they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle and the
tabernacle of the congregation his covering and the covering
of the badgers skins that is above upon it and the hanging
for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation
and the hangings of the court and the hanging for the door of
the gate of the court which is by the tabernacle and by the
altar round about and their cords and all the instruments of
their service and all that is made for them so shall they
serve.
at the appointment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the
service of the sons of the Gershonites in all their burdens
and in all their service and ye shall appoint unto them in
charge all their burdens.
this is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in
the tabernacle of the congregation and their charge shall be
under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
as for the sons of Merari thou shalt number them after their
families by the house of their fathers
from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old
shalt thou number them every one that entereth into the
service to do the work of the tabernacle of the congregation.
and this is the charge of their burden according to all their
service in the tabernacle of the congregation the boards of
the tabernacle and the bars thereof and the pillars thereof
and sockets thereof
and the pillars of the court round about and their sockets
and their pins and their cords with all their instruments
and with all their service and by name ye shall reckon the
instruments of the charge of their burden.
this is the service of the families of the sons of Merari
according to all their service in the tabernacle of the
congregation under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the
priest.
and Moses and Aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered
the sons of the Kohathites after their families and after the
house of their fathers
from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old
every one that entereth into the service for the work in the
tabernacle of the congregation
and those that were numbered of them by their families were
two thousand seven hundred and fifty.
these were they that were numbered of the families of the
Kohathites all that might do service in the tabernacle of the
congregation which Moses and Aaron did number according to
the commandment of the lord by the hand of Moses.
and those that were numbered of the sons of Gershon
throughout their families and by the house of their fathers
from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old
every one that entereth into the service for the work in the
tabernacle of the congregation
even those that were numbered of them throughout their
families by the house of their fathers were two thousand and
six hundred and thirty.
these are they that were numbered of the families of the sons
of Gershon of all that might do service in the tabernacle of
the congregation whom Moses and Aaron did number according to
the commandment of the lord.
and those that were numbered of the families of the sons of
Merari throughout their families by the house of their
fathers
from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old
every one that entereth into the service for the work in the
tabernacle of the congregation
even those that were numbered of them after their families
were three thousand and two hundred.
these be those that were numbered of the families of the sons
of Merari whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the word
of the lord by the hand of Moses.
all those that were numbered of the Levites whom Moses and
Aaron and the chief of Israel numbered after their families
and after the house of their fathers
from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old
every one that came to do the service of the ministry and the
service of the burden in the tabernacle of the congregation.
even those that were numbered of them were eight thousand and
five hundred and fourscore
according to the commandment of the lord they were numbered by
the hand of Moses every one according to his service and
according to his burden thus were they numbered of him as
the lord commanded Moses.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
command the children of Israel that they put out of the camp
every leper and every one that hath an issue and whosoever
is defiled by the dead
both Male and female shall ye put out without the camp shall
ye put them that they defile not their camps in the midst
whereof I dwell.
and the children of Israel did so and put them out without
the camp as the lord spake unto Moses so did the children of
Israel.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel when a man or woman shall
commit any Sin that men commit to do a trespass against the
lord and that person be guilty
then they shall confess their Sin which they have done and he
shall recompense his trespass with the principal thereof and
add unto it the fifth part thereof and give it unto him
against whom he hath trespassed.
but if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass
unto let the trespass be recompensed unto the lord even to
the priest beside the Ram of the atonement whereby an
atonement shall be made for him.
and every offering of all the holy things of the children of
Israel which they bring unto the priest shall be his.
and every man s hallowed things shall be his whatsoever any
man giveth the priest it shall be his.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them if any
man s wife go aside and commit a trespass against him
and a man lie with her carnally and it be hid from the eyes
of her husband and be kept close and she be defiled and
there be no witness against her Neither she be taken with the
manner
and the spirit of jealousy come upon him and he be jealous of
his wife and she be defiled or if the spirit of jealousy
come upon him and he be jealous of his wife and she be not
defiled
then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest and he
shall bring her offering for her the tenth part of an Ephah
of barley meal he shall pour no oil upon it nor put
frankincense thereon for it is an offering of jealousy an
offering of memorial bringing iniquity to remembrance.
and the priest shall bring her near and set her before the
lord
and the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel and
of the dust that is in the floor of the tabernacle the priest
shall take and put it into the water
and the priest shall set the woman before the lord and
uncover the woman s head and put the offering of memorial in
her hands which is the jealousy offering and the priest
shall have in his hand the bitter water that causeth the
curse
and the priest shall charge her by an oath and say unto the
woman if no man have lain with thee and if thou hast not
gone aside to uncleanness with another instead of thy husband
be thou free from this bitter water that causeth the curse
but if thou hast gone aside to another instead of thy husband
and if thou be defiled and some man have lain with thee
beside thine husband
then the priest shall charge the woman with an oath of
cursing and the priest shall say unto the woman the lord
make thee a curse and an oath among thy people when the lord
doth make thy thigh to rot and thy belly to swell
and this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy
bowels to make thy belly to swell and thy thigh to rot and
the woman shall say Amen Amen.
and the priest shall write these curses in a book and he
shall blot them out with the bitter water
and he shall cause the woman to drink the bitter water that
causeth the curse and the water that causeth the curse shall
enter into her and become bitter.
then the priest shall take the jealousy offering out of the
woman s hand and shall wave the offering before the lord and
offer it upon the altar
and the priest shall take an handful of the offering even the
memorial thereof and burn it upon the altar and afterward
shall cause the woman to drink the water.
and when he hath made her to drink the water then it shall
come to pass that if she be defiled and have done trespass
against her husband that the water that causeth the curse
shall enter into her and become bitter and her belly shall
swell and her thigh shall rot and the woman shall be a curse
among her people.
and if the woman be not defiled but be clean then she shall
be free and shall conceive seed.
this is the law of jealousies when a wife goeth aside to
another instead of her husband and is defiled
or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him and he be
jealous over his wife and shall set the woman before the
lord and the priest shall execute upon her all this law.
then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity and this woman
shall bear her iniquity.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them when
either man or woman shall separate themselves to vow a vow of
a Nazarite to separate themselves unto the lord
he shall separate himself from wine and strong drink and
shall drink no vinegar of wine or vinegar of strong drink
Neither shall he drink any liquor of grapes nor eat moist
grapes or dried.
all the days of his separation shall he eat nothing that is
made of the vine tree from the kernels even to the husk.
all the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor
come upon his head until the days be fulfilled in the which
he separateth himself unto the lord he shall be holy and
shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow.
all the days that he separateth himself unto the lord he shall
come at no dead body.
he shall not make himself unclean for his father or for his
mother for his brother or for his sister when they die
because the consecration of his God is upon his head.
all the days of his separation he is holy unto the lord.
and if any man die very suddenly by him and he hath defiled
the head of his consecration then he shall shave his head in
the day of his cleansing on the seventh day shall he shave
it.
and on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles or two young
pigeons to the priest to the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation
and the priest shall offer the one for a Sin offering and the
other for a burnt offering and make an atonement for him for
that he sinned by the dead and shall hallow his head that
same day.
and he shall consecrate unto the lord the days of his
separation and shall bring a lamb of the first year for a
trespass offering but the days that were before shall be
lost because his separation was defiled.
and this is the law of the Nazarite when the days of his
separation are fulfilled he shall be brought unto the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation
and he shall offer his offering unto the lord one he lamb of
the first year without blemish for a burnt offering and one
ewe lamb of the first year without blemish for a Sin offering
and one Ram without blemish for peace offerings
and a basket of unleavened bread cakes of fine flour mingled
with oil and wafers of unleavened bread anointed with oil
and their meat offering and their drink offerings.
and the priest shall bring them before the lord and shall
offer his Sin offering and his burnt offering
and he shall offer the Ram for a sacrifice of peace offerings
unto the lord with the basket of unleavened bread the priest
shall offer also his meat offering and his drink offering.
and the Nazarite shall shave the head of his separation at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation and shall take the
hair of the head of his separation and put it in the fire
which is under the sacrifice of the peace offerings.
and the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the Ram and
one unleavened cake out of the basket and one unleavened
wafer and shall put them upon the hands of the Nazarite
after the hair of his separation is shaven
and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before the
lord this is holy for the priest with the wave breast and
heave shoulder and after that the Nazarite may drink wine.
this is the law of the Nazarite who hath vowed and of his
offering unto the lord for his separation beside that that
his hand shall get according to the vow which he vowed so he
must do after the law of his separation.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto Aaron and unto his sons saying on this wise ye
shall bless the children of Israel saying unto them
the lord bless thee and keep thee
the lord make his face shine upon thee and be gracious unto
thee
the lord lift up his countenance upon thee and give thee
peace.
and they shall put my name upon the children of Israel and I
will bless them.
and it came to pass on the day that Moses had fully set up the
tabernacle and had anointed it and sanctified it and all
the instruments thereof both the altar and all the vessels
thereof and had anointed them and sanctified them
that the princes of Israel heads of the house of their
fathers who were the princes of the tribes and were over
them that were numbered offered
and they brought their offering before the lord six covered
wagons and twelve oxen a wagon for two of the princes and
for each one an ox and they brought them before the
tabernacle.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
take it of them that they may be to do the service of the
tabernacle of the congregation and thou shalt give them unto
the Levites to every man according to his service.
and Moses took the wagons and the oxen and gave them unto the
Levites.
two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of Gershon
according to their service
and four wagons and eight oxen he gave unto the sons of
Merari according unto their service under the hand of
Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
but unto the sons of Kohath he gave none because the service
of the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear
upon their shoulders.
and the princes offered for dedicating of the altar in the day
that it was anointed even the princes offered their offering
before the altar.
and the lord said unto Moses they shall offer their offering
each prince on his day for the dedicating of the altar.
and he that offered his offering the first day was Nahshon the
son of Amminadab of the tribe of Judah
and his offering was one Silver charger the weight thereof
was an hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of seventy
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them were
full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one spoon of Ten shekels of gold full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
on the second day Nethaneel the son of Zuar prince of
Issachar did offer
he offered for his offering one Silver charger the weight
whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of
seventy shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of
them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one spoon of gold of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
on the third day Eliab the son of Helon prince of the
children of Zebulun did offer
his offering was one Silver charger the weight whereof was an
hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of seventy
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one golden spoon of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Eliab the son of Helon.
on the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur prince of the
children of Reuben did offer
his offering was one Silver charger of the weight of an
hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of seventy
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one golden spoon of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur.
on the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai prince of
the children of Simeon did offer
his offering was one Silver charger the weight whereof was an
hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of seventy
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one golden spoon of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
on the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel prince of the
children of Gad offered
his offering was one Silver charger of the weight of an
hundred and thirty shekels a Silver bowl of seventy shekels
after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one golden spoon of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
on the seventh day Elishama the son of Ammihud prince of the
children of Ephraim offered
his offering was one Silver charger the weight whereof was an
hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of seventy
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one golden spoon of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud.
on the eighth day offered Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur prince
of the children of Manasseh
his offering was one Silver charger of the weight of an
hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of seventy
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one golden spoon of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
on the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni prince of the
children of Benjamin offered
his offering was one Silver charger the weight whereof was an
hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of seventy
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one golden spoon of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni.
on the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai prince of the
children of Dan offered
his offering was one Silver charger the weight whereof was an
hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of seventy
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one golden spoon of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
on the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ocran prince of the
children of Asher offered
his offering was one Silver charger the weight whereof was an
hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of seventy
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one golden spoon of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Pagiel the son of Ocran.
on the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan prince of the
children of Naphtali offered
his offering was one Silver charger the weight whereof was an
hundred and thirty shekels one Silver bowl of seventy
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering
one golden spoon of Ten shekels full of incense
one young bullock one Ram one lamb of the first year for a
burnt offering
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering
and for a sacrifice of peace offerings two oxen five rams
five he goats five lambs of the first year this was the
offering of Ahira the son of Enan.
this was the dedication of the altar in the day when it was
anointed by the princes of Israel twelve chargers of Silver
twelve Silver bowls twelve spoons of gold
each charger of Silver weighing an hundred and thirty shekels
each bowl seventy all the Silver vessels weighed two thousand
and four hundred shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary
the golden spoons were twelve full of incense weighing Ten
shekels apiece after the shekel of the sanctuary all the
gold of the spoons was an hundred and twenty shekels.
all the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks the
rams twelve the lambs of the first year twelve with their
meat offering and the kids of the goats for Sin offering
twelve.
and all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings were
twenty and four bullocks the rams sixty the he goats sixty
the lambs of the first year sixty. this was the dedication of
the altar after that it was anointed.
and when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the
congregation to speak with him then he heard the voice of one
speaking unto him from off the mercy seat that was upon the
ark of testimony from between the two Cherubims and he spake
unto him.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto Aaron and say unto him when thou lightest the
lamps the seven lamps shall give light over against the
candlestick.
and Aaron did so he lighted the lamps thereof over against
the candlestick as the lord commanded Moses.
and this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold unto the
shaft thereof unto the flowers thereof was beaten work
according unto the pattern which the lord had shewed Moses so
he made the candlestick.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
take the Levites from among the children of Israel and
cleanse them.
and thus shalt thou do unto them to cleanse them sprinkle
water of purifying upon them and let them shave all their
flesh and let them wash their clothes and so make themselves
clean.
then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering
even fine flour mingled with oil and another young bullock
shalt thou take for a Sin offering.
and thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the
congregation and thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the
children of Israel together
and thou shalt bring the Levites before the lord and the
children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites
and Aaron shall offer the Levites before the lord for an
offering of the children of Israel that they may execute the
service of the lord.
and the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the
bullocks and thou shalt offer the one for a Sin offering and
the other for a burnt offering unto the lord to make an
atonement for the Levites.
and thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron and before his
sons and offer them for an offering unto the lord.
thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children
of Israel and the Levites shall be mine.
and after that shall the Levites go in to do the service of
the tabernacle of the congregation and thou shalt cleanse
them and offer them for an offering.
for they are wholly given unto me from among the children of
Israel instead of such as open every womb even instead of
the firstborn of all the children of Israel have I taken them
unto me.
for all the firstborn of the children of Israel are mine both
man and beast on the day that I smote every firstborn in the
land of Egypt I sanctified them for myself.
and I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the
children of Israel.
and I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his
sons from among the children of Israel to do the service of
the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the congregation
and to make an atonement for the children of Israel that
there be no plague among the children of Israel when the
children of Israel come nigh unto the sanctuary.
and Moses and Aaron and all the congregation of the children
of Israel did to the Levites according unto all that the lord
commanded Moses concerning the Levites so did the children of
Israel unto them.
and the Levites were purified and they washed their clothes
and Aaron offered them as an offering before the lord and
Aaron made an atonement for them to cleanse them.
and after that went the Levites in to do their service in the
tabernacle of the congregation before Aaron and before his
sons as the lord had commanded Moses concerning the Levites
so did they unto them.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
this is it that belongeth unto the Levites from twenty and
five years old and upward they shall go in to wait upon the
service of the tabernacle of the congregation
and from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon
the service thereof and shall serve no more
but shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of
the congregation to keep the charge and shall do no service.
thus shalt thou do unto the Levites touching their charge.
and the lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai in
the first month of the second year after they were come out of
the land of Egypt saying
let the children of Israel also keep the passover at his
appointed season.
in the fourteenth day of this month at even ye shall keep it
in his appointed season according to all the rites of it and
according to all the ceremonies thereof shall ye keep it.
and Moses spake unto the children of Israel that they should
keep the passover.
and they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first
month at even in the wilderness of Sinai according to all
that the lord commanded Moses so did the children of Israel.
and there were certain men who were defiled by the dead body
of a man that they could not keep the passover on that day
and they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day
and those men said unto him we are defiled by the dead body
of a man wherefore are we kept back that we may not offer an
offering of the lord in his appointed season among the
children of Israel?
and Moses said unto them stand still and I will hear what
the lord will command concerning you.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel saying if any man of you
or of your posterity shall be unclean by reason of a dead
body or be in a journey afar off yet he shall keep the
passover unto the lord.
the fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep
it and eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.
they shall leave none of it unto the morning nor break any
bone of it according to all the ordinances of the passover
they shall keep it.
but the man that is clean and is not in a journey and
forbeareth to keep the passover even the same soul shall be
cut off from among his people because he brought not the
offering of the lord in his appointed season that man shall
bear his Sin.
and if a stranger shall Sojourn among you and will keep the
passover unto the lord according to the ordinance of the
passover and according to the manner thereof so shall he do
ye shall have one ordinance both for the stranger and for
him that was born in the land.
and on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud
covered the tabernacle namely the tent of the testimony and
at even there was upon the tabernacle as it were the
appearance of fire until the morning.
so it was alway the cloud covered it by day and the
appearance of fire by night.
and when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle then
after that the children of Israel journeyed and in the place
where the cloud abode there the children of Israel pitched
their tents.
at the commandment of the lord the children of Israel
journeyed and at the commandment of the lord they pitched as
long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they rested in
their tents.
and when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many days
then the children of Israel kept the charge of the lord and
journeyed not.
and so it was when the cloud was a few days upon the
tabernacle according to the commandment of the lord they
abode in their tents and according to the commandment of the
lord they journeyed.
and so it was when the cloud abode from even unto the
morning and that the cloud was taken up in the morning then
they journeyed whether it was by day or by night that the
cloud was taken up they journeyed.
or whether it were two days or a month or a year that the
cloud tarried upon the tabernacle remaining thereon the
children of Israel abode in their tents and journeyed not
but when it was taken up they journeyed.
at the commandment of the lord they rested in the tents and
at the commandment of the lord they journeyed they kept the
charge of the lord at the commandment of the lord by the hand
of Moses.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
make thee two trumpets of Silver of a whole piece shalt thou
make them that thou mayest use them for the calling of the
assembly and for the journeying of the camps.
and when they shall blow with them all the assembly shall
assemble themselves to thee at the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation.
and if they blow but with one trumpet then the princes which
are heads of the thousands of Israel shall gather themselves
unto thee.
when ye blow an alarm then the camps that lie on the east
parts shall go forward.
when ye blow an alarm the second time then the camps that lie
on the south side shall take their journey they shall blow an
alarm for their journeys.
but when the congregation is to be gathered together ye shall
blow but ye shall not sound an alarm.
and the sons of Aaron the priests shall blow with the
trumpets and they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever
throughout your generations.
and if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that
oppresseth you then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets
and ye shall be remembered before the lord your God and ye
shall be saved from your enemies.
also in the day of your gladness and in your solemn days and
in the beginnings of your months ye shall blow with the
trumpets over your burnt offerings and over the sacrifices of
your peace offerings that they may be to you for a memorial
before your God I Am the lord your God.
and it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month
in the second year that the cloud was taken up from off the
tabernacle of the testimony.
and the children of Israel took their journeys out of the
wilderness of Sinai and the cloud rested in the wilderness of
Paran.
and they first took their journey according to the commandment
of the lord by the hand of Moses.
in the first place went the standard of the camp of the
children of Judah according to their armies and over his host
was Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
and over the host of the tribe of the children of Issachar was
Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
and over the host of the tribe of the children of Zebulun was
Eliab the son of Helon.
and the tabernacle was taken down and the sons of Gershon and
the sons of Merari set forward bearing the tabernacle.
and the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward according
to their armies and over his host was Elizur the son of
Shedeur.
and over the host of the tribe of the children of Simeon was
Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
and over the host of the tribe of the children of Gad was
Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
and the Kohathites set forward bearing the sanctuary and the
other did set up the tabernacle against they came.
and the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set
forward according to their armies and over his host was
Elishama the son of Ammihud.
and over the host of the tribe of the children of Manasseh was
Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
and over the host of the tribe of the children of Benjamin was
Abidan the son of Gideoni.
and the standard of the camp of the children of Dan set
forward which was the rereward of all the camps throughout
their hosts and over his host was Ahiezer the son of
Ammishaddai.
and over the host of the tribe of the children of Asher was
Pagiel the son of Ocran.
and over the host of the tribe of the children of Naphtali was
Ahira the son of Enan.
thus were the journeyings of the children of Israel according
to their armies when they set forward.
and Moses said unto Hobab the son of Raguel the Midianite
Moses father in law we are journeying unto the place of
which the lord said I will give it you come thou with us
and we will do thee good for the lord hath spoken good
concerning Israel.
and he said unto him I will not go but I will depart to mine
own land and to my kindred.
and he said leave us not I pray thee forasmuch as thou
knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness and thou
mayest be to us instead of eyes.
and it shall be if thou go with us yea it shall be that
what goodness the lord shall do unto us the same will we do
unto thee.
and they departed from the mount of the lord three days
journey and the ark of the covenant of the lord went before
them in the three days journey to search out a resting place
for them.
and the cloud of the lord was upon them by day when they went
out of the camp.
and it came to pass when the ark set forward that Moses
said rise up lord and let thine enemies be scattered and
let them that hate thee flee before thee.
and when it rested he said return O lord unto the many
thousands of Israel.
and when the people complained it displeased the lord and
the lord heard it and his anger was kindled and the fire of
the lord burnt among them and consumed them that were in the
uttermost parts of the camp.
and the people cried unto Moses and when Moses prayed unto
the lord the fire was quenched.
and he called the name of the place Taberah because the fire
of the lord burnt among them.
and the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting and
the children of Israel also wept again and said who shall
give us flesh to eat?
we remember the fish which we did eat in Egypt freely the
cucumbers and the melons and the leeks and the onions and
the garlick
but now our soul is dried away there is nothing at all
beside this Manna before our eyes.
and the Manna was as coriander seed and the colour thereof as
the colour of bdellium.
and the people went about and gathered it and ground it in
mills or beat it in a mortar and baked it in pans and made
cakes of it and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh
oil.
and when the dew fell upon the camp in the night the Manna
fell upon it.
then Moses heard the people weep throughout their families
every man in the door of his tent and the anger of the lord
was kindled greatly Moses also was displeased.
and Moses said unto the lord wherefore hast thou afflicted
thy servant? and wherefore have I not found favour in thy
sight that thou layest the burden of all this people upon me?
have I conceived all this people? have I begotten them that
thou shouldest say unto me carry them in thy bosom as a
nursing father beareth the sucking child unto the land which
thou swarest unto their fathers?
whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people? for
they weep unto me saying give us flesh that we may eat.
I Am not able to bear all this people alone because it is too
heavy for me.
and if thou deal thus with me kill me I pray thee out of
hand if I have found favour in thy sight and let me not see
my wretchedness.
and the lord said unto Moses gather unto me seventy men of
the elders of Israel whom thou knowest to be the elders of
the people and officers over them and bring them unto the
tabernacle of the congregation that they may stand there with
thee.
and I will come down and talk with thee there and I will take
of the spirit which is upon thee and will put it upon them
and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee that
thou bear it not thyself alone.
and say thou unto the people sanctify yourselves against to
morrow and ye shall eat flesh for ye have wept in the ears
of the lord saying who shall give us flesh to eat? for it
was well with us in Egypt therefore the lord will give you
flesh and ye shall eat.
ye shall not eat one day nor two days nor five days Neither
Ten days nor twenty days
but even a whole month until it come out at your nostrils
and it be loathsome unto you because that ye have despised
the lord which is among you and have wept before him saying
why came we forth out of Egypt?
and Moses said the people among whom I Am are six hundred
thousand footmen and thou hast said I will give them flesh
that they may eat a whole month.
shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them to suffice
them? or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together
for them to suffice them?
and the lord said unto Moses is the lord s hand waxed short?
thou shalt see now whether my word shall come to pass unto
thee or not.
and Moses went out and told the people the words of the lord
and gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people and
set them round about the tabernacle.
and the lord came down in a cloud and spake unto him and
took of the spirit that was upon him and gave it unto the
seventy elders and it came to pass that when the spirit
rested upon them they prophesied and did not cease.
but there remained two of the men in the camp the name of the
one was Eldad and the name of the other Medad and the spirit
rested upon them and they were of them that were written but
went not out unto the tabernacle and they prophesied in the
camp.
and there ran a young man and told Moses and said Eldad and
Medad do prophesy in the camp.
and Joshua the son of Nun the servant of Moses one of his
young men answered and said my lord Moses forbid them.
and Moses said unto him enviest thou for my sake? would God
that all the lord s people were prophets and that the lord
would put his spirit upon them
and Moses gat him into the camp he and the elders of Israel.
and there went forth a wind from the lord and brought quails
from the sea and let them fall by the camp as it were a
day s journey on this side and as it were a day s journey on
the other side round about the camp and as it were two
cubits high upon the face of the earth.
and the people stood up all that day and all that night and
all the next day and they gathered the quails he that
gathered least gathered Ten homers and they spread them all
abroad for themselves round about the camp.
and while the flesh was yet between their teeth ere it was
chewed the wrath of the lord was kindled against the people
and the lord smote the people with a very great plague.
and he called the name of that place Kibrothhattaavah because
there they buried the people that lusted.
and the people journeyed from Kibrothhattaavah unto Hazeroth
and abode at Hazeroth.
and Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the
Ethiopian woman whom he had married for he had married an
Ethiopian woman.
and they said hath the lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath
he not spoken also by us? and the lord heard it.
 now the man Moses was very meek above all the men which were
upon the face of the earth.
and the lord spake suddenly unto Moses and unto Aaron and
unto Miriam come out ye three unto the tabernacle of the
congregation. and they three came out.
and the lord came down in the pillar of the cloud and stood
in the door of the tabernacle and called Aaron and Miriam
and they both came forth.
and he said hear now my words if there be a prophet among
you I the lord will make myself known unto him in a vision
and will speak unto him in a dream.
my servant Moses is not so who is faithful in all mine house.
with him will I speak mouth to mouth even apparently and not
in dark speeches and the similitude of the lord shall he
behold wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my
servant Moses?
and the anger of the lord was kindled against them and he
departed.
and the cloud departed from off the tabernacle and behold
Miriam became leprous white as snow and Aaron looked upon
Miriam and behold she was leprous.
and Aaron said unto Moses alas my lord I beseech thee lay
not the Sin upon us wherein we have done foolishly and
wherein we have sinned.
let her not be as one dead of whom the flesh is half consumed
when he cometh out of his mother s womb.
and Moses cried unto the lord saying heal her now O God I
beseech thee.
and the lord said unto Moses if her father had but spit in
her face should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be
shut out from the camp seven days and after that let her be
received in again.
and Miriam was shut out from the camp seven days and the
people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.
and afterward the people removed from Hazeroth and pitched in
the wilderness of Paran.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
send thou men that they may search the land of Canaan which
I give unto the children of Israel of every tribe of their
fathers shall ye send a man every one a ruler among them.
and Moses by the commandment of the lord sent them from the
wilderness of Paran all those men were heads of the children
of Israel.
and these were their names of the tribe of Reuben Shammua
the son of Zaccur.
of the tribe of Simeon Shaphat the son of Hori.
of the tribe of Judah Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
of the tribe of Issachar Igal the son of Joseph.
of the tribe of Ephraim Oshea the son of Nun.
of the tribe of Benjamin Palti the son of Raphu.
of the tribe of Zebulun Gaddiel the son of Sodi.
of the tribe of Joseph namely of the tribe of Manasseh
Gaddi the son of Susi.
of the tribe of Dan Ammiel the son of Gemalli.
of the tribe of Asher Sethur the son of Michael.
of the tribe of Naphtali Nahbi the son of Vophsi.
of the tribe of Gad Geuel the son of Machi.
these are the names of the men which Moses sent to spy out the
land. and Moses called Oshea the son of Nun Jehoshua.
and Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan and said
unto them get you up this way southward and go up into the
mountain
and see the land what it is and the people that dwelleth
therein whether they be strong or weak few or many
and what the land is that they dwell in whether it be good or
bad and what cities they be that they dwell in whether in
tents or in strong holds
and what the land is whether it be fat or lean whether there
be wood therein or not. and be ye of good courage and bring
of the fruit of the land. now the time was the time of the
firstripe grapes.
so they went up and searched the land from the wilderness of
Zin unto Rehob as men come to Hamath.
and they ascended by the south and came unto Hebron where
Ahiman Sheshai and Talmai the children of Anak were. now
Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.
and they came unto the brook of Eshcol and cut down from
thence a branch with one cluster of grapes and they bare it
between two upon a staff and they brought of the
pomegranates and of the figs.
the place was called the brook Eshcol because of the cluster
of grapes which the children of Israel cut down from thence.
and they returned from searching of the land after forty days.
and they went and came to Moses and to Aaron and to all the
congregation of the children of Israel unto the wilderness of
Paran to Kadesh and brought back word unto them and unto
all the congregation and shewed them the fruit of the land.
and they told him and said we came unto the land whither
thou sentest us and surely it floweth with milk and honey
and this is the fruit of it.
nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land and
the cities are walled and very great and moreover we saw the
children of Anak there.
the Amalekites dwell in the land of the south and the
Hittites and the Jebusites and the Amorites dwell in the
mountains and the Canaanites dwell by the sea and by the
coast of Jordan.
and Caleb stilled the people before Moses and said let us go
up at once and possess it for we are well able to overcome
it.
but the men that went up with him said we be not able to go
up against the people for they are stronger than we.
and they brought up an evil report of the land which they had
searched unto the children of Israel saying the land
through which we have gone to search it is a land that eateth
up the inhabitants thereof and all the people that we saw in
it are men of a great stature.
and there we saw the giants the sons of Anak which come of
the giants and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers and
so we were in their sight.
and all the congregation lifted up their voice and cried and
the people wept that night.
and all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and
against Aaron and the whole congregation said unto them
would God that we had died in the land of Egypt or would God
we had died in this wilderness
and wherefore hath the lord brought us unto this land to fall
by the sword that our wives and our children should be a
prey? were it not better for us to return into Egypt?
and they said one to another let us make a captain and let
us return into Egypt.
then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the
assembly of the congregation of the children of Israel.
and Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh
which were of them that searched the land rent their clothes
and they spake unto all the company of the children of Israel
saying the land which we passed through to search it is an
exceeding good land.
if the lord delight in us then he will bring us into this
land and give it us a land which floweth with milk and
honey.
only rebel not ye against the lord Neither fear ye the people
of the land for they are bread for us their defence is
departed from them and the lord is with us fear them not.
but all the congregation bade stone them with stones. and the
glory of the lord appeared in the tabernacle of the
congregation before all the children of Israel.
and the lord said unto Moses how long will this people
provoke me? and how long will it be ere they believe me for
all the signs which I have shewed among them?
I will smite them with the pestilence and disinherit them
and will make of thee a greater nation and mightier than they.
and Moses said unto the lord then the Egyptians shall hear
it for thou broughtest up this people in thy might from
among them
and they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land for
they have heard that thou lord art among this people that
thou lord art seen face to face and that thy cloud standeth
over them and that thou goest before them by day time in a
pillar of a cloud and in a pillar of fire by night.
now if thou shalt kill all this people as one man then the
nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak saying
because the lord was not able to bring this people into the
land which he sware unto them therefore he hath slain them in
the wilderness.
and now I beseech thee let the power of my lord be great
according as thou hast spoken saying
the lord is longsuffering and of great mercy forgiving
iniquity and transgression and by no means clearing the
guilty visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation.
pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of this people according
unto the greatness of thy mercy and as thou hast forgiven
this people from Egypt even until now.
and the lord said I have pardoned according to thy word
but as truly as I live all the earth shall be filled with the
glory of the lord.
because all those men which have seen my glory and my
miracles which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness and have
tempted me now these Ten times and have not hearkened to my
voice
surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto their
fathers Neither shall any of them that provoked me see it
but my servant Caleb because he had another spirit with him
and hath followed me fully him will I bring into the land
whereinto he went and his seed shall possess it.
 now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.
tomorrow turn you and get you into the wilderness by the way
of the red sea.
and the lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying
how long shall I bear with this evil congregation which
murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings of the children
of Israel which they murmur against me.
say unto them as truly as I live saith the lord as ye have
spoken in mine ears so will I do to you
your carcases shall fall in this wilderness and all that were
numbered of you according to your whole number from twenty
years old and upward which have murmured against me.
doubtless ye shall not come into the land concerning which I
sware to make you dwell therein save Caleb the son of
Jephunneh and Joshua the son of Nun.
but your little ones which ye said should be a prey them
will I bring in and they shall know the land which ye have
despised.
but as for you your carcases they shall fall in this
wilderness.
and your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years
and bear your whoredoms until your carcases be wasted in the
wilderness.
after the number of the days in which ye searched the land
even forty days each day for a year shall ye bear your
iniquities even forty years and ye shall know my breach of
promise.
I the lord have said I will surely do it unto all this evil
congregation that are gathered together against me in this
wilderness they shall be consumed and there they shall die.
and the men which Moses sent to search the land who
returned and made all the congregation to murmur against him
by bringing up a slander upon the land
even those men that did bring up the evil report upon the
land died by the plague before the lord.
but Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh
which were of the men that went to search the land lived
still.
and Moses told these sayings unto all the children of Israel
and the people mourned greatly.
and they rose up early in the morning and gat them up into
the top of the mountain saying lo we be here and will go
up unto the place which the lord hath promised for we have
sinned.
and Moses said wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment
of the lord? but it shall not prosper.
go not up for the lord is not among you that ye be not
smitten before your enemies.
for the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you
and ye shall fall by the sword because ye are turned away
from the lord therefore the lord will not be with you.
but they presumed to go up unto the hill top nevertheless the
ark of the covenant of the lord and Moses departed not out
of the camp.
then the Amalekites came down and the Canaanites which dwelt
in that hill and smote them and discomfited them even unto
Hormah.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them when ye
be come into the land of your habitations which I give unto
you
and will make an offering by fire unto the lord a burnt
offering or a sacrifice in performing a vow or in a freewill
offering or in your solemn feasts to make a sweet savour
unto the lord of the herd or of the flock
then shall he that offereth his offering unto the lord bring a
meat offering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth
part of an hin of oil.
and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering
shalt thou prepare with the burnt offering or sacrifice for
one lamb.
or for a Ram thou shalt prepare for a meat offering two tenth
deals of flour mingled with the third part of an hin of oil.
and for a drink offering thou shalt offer the third part of an
hin of wine for a sweet savour unto the lord.
and when thou preparest a bullock for a burnt offering or for
a sacrifice in performing a vow or peace offerings unto the
lord
then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offering of three
tenth deals of flour mingled with half an hin of oil.
and thou shalt bring for a drink offering half an hin of wine
for an offering made by fire of a sweet savour unto the lord.
thus shall it be done for one bullock or for one Ram or for
a lamb or a kid.
according to the number that ye shall prepare so shall ye do
to every one according to their number.
all that are born of the country shall do these things after
this manner in offering an offering made by fire of a sweet
savour unto the lord.
and if a stranger Sojourn with you or whosoever be among you
in your generations and will offer an offering made by fire
of a sweet savour unto the lord as ye do so he shall do.
one ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation and
also for the stranger that sojourneth with you an ordinance
for ever in your generations as ye are so shall the stranger
be before the lord.
one law and one manner shall be for you and for the stranger
that sojourneth with you.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them when ye
come into the land whither I bring you
then it shall be that when ye eat of the bread of the land
ye shall offer up an heave offering unto the lord.
ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough for an
heave offering as ye do the heave offering of the
threshingfloor so shall ye heave it.
of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the lord an
heave offering in your generations.
and if ye have erred and not observed all these commandments
which the lord hath spoken unto Moses
even all that the lord hath commanded you by the hand of
Moses from the day that the lord commanded Moses and
henceforward among your generations
then it shall be if ought be committed by ignorance without
the knowledge of the congregation that all the congregation
shall offer one young bullock for a burnt offering for a
sweet savour unto the lord with his meat offering and his
drink offering according to the manner and one kid of the
goats for a Sin offering.
and the priest shall make an atonement for all the
congregation of the children of Israel and it shall be
forgiven them for it is ignorance and they shall bring their
offering a sacrifice made by fire unto the lord and their
Sin offering before the lord for their ignorance
and it shall be forgiven all the congregation of the children
of Israel and the stranger that sojourneth among them seeing
all the people were in ignorance.
and if any soul Sin through ignorance then he shall bring a
she goat of the first year for a Sin offering.
and the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that
sinneth ignorantly when he sinneth by ignorance before the
lord to make an atonement for him and it shall be forgiven
him.
ye shall have one law for him that sinneth through ignorance
both for him that is born among the children of Israel and
for the stranger that sojourneth among them.
but the soul that doeth ought presumptuously whether he be
born in the land or a stranger the same reproacheth the
lord and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
because he hath despised the word of the lord and hath broken
his commandment that soul shall utterly be cut off his
iniquity shall be upon him.
and while the children of Israel were in the wilderness they
found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day.
and they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto
Moses and Aaron and unto all the congregation.
and they put him in ward because it was not declared what
should be done to him.
and the lord said unto Moses the man shall be surely put to
death all the congregation shall stone him with stones
without the camp.
and all the congregation brought him without the camp and
stoned him with stones and he died as the lord commanded
Moses.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and bid them that they make
them fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their
generations and that they put upon the fringe of the borders
a ribband of blue
and it shall be unto you for a fringe that ye may look upon
it and remember all the commandments of the lord and do
them and that ye seek not after your own heart and your own
eyes after which ye use to go a whoring
that ye may remember and do all my commandments and be holy
unto your God.
I Am the lord your God which brought you out of the land of
Egypt to be your God I Am the lord your God.
now Korah the son of Izhar the son of Kohath the son of
Levi and Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab and on the
son of Peleth sons of Reuben took men
and they rose up before Moses with certain of the children of
Israel two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly famous
in the congregation men of renown
and they gathered themselves together against Moses and
against Aaron and said unto them ye take too Much upon you
seeing all the congregation are holy every one of them and
the lord is among them wherefore then lift ye up yourselves
above the congregation of the lord?
and when Moses heard it he fell upon his face
and he spake unto Korah and unto all his company saying even
to morrow the lord will shew who are his and who is holy and
will cause him to come near unto him even him whom he hath
chosen will he cause to come near unto him.
this do take you censers Korah and all his company
and put fire therein and put incense in them before the lord
to morrow and it shall be that the man whom the lord doth
choose he shall be holy ye take too Much upon you ye sons
of Levi.
and Moses said unto Korah hear I pray you ye sons of Levi
seemeth it but a small thing unto you that the God of Israel
hath separated you from the congregation of Israel to bring
you near to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the
lord and to stand before the congregation to minister unto
them?
and he hath brought thee near to him and all thy brethren the
sons of Levi with thee and seek ye the priesthood also?
for which cause both thou and all thy company are gathered
together against the lord and what is Aaron that ye murmur
against him?
and Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab
which said we will not come up
is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land
that floweth with milk and honey to kill us in the
wilderness except thou make thyself altogether a prince over
us?
moreover thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth
with milk and honey or given us inheritance of fields and
vineyards wilt thou put out the eyes of these men? we will
not come up.
and Moses was very wroth and said unto the lord respect not
thou their offering I have not taken one ass from them
Neither have I hurt one of them.
and Moses said unto Korah be thou and all thy company before
the lord thou and they and Aaron to morrow
and take every man his censer and put incense in them and
bring ye before the lord every man his censer two hundred and
fifty censers thou also and Aaron each of you his censer.
and they took every man his censer and put fire in them and
laid incense thereon and stood in the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation with Moses and Aaron.
and Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation and the glory of
the lord appeared unto all the congregation.
and the lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying
separate yourselves from among this congregation that I may
consume them in a moment.
and they fell upon their faces and said O God the God of
the spirits of all flesh shall one man Sin and wilt thou be
wroth with all the congregation?
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the congregation saying get you up from about the
tabernacle of Korah Dathan and Abiram.
and Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and Abiram and the
elders of Israel followed him.
and he spake unto the congregation saying depart I pray
you from the tents of these wicked men and touch nothing of
their s lest ye be consumed in all their sins.
so they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah Dathan and
Abiram on every side and Dathan and Abiram came out and
stood in the door of their tents and their wives and their
sons and their little children.
and Moses said hereby ye shall know that the lord hath sent
me to do all these works for I have not done them of mine own
mind.
if these men die the common death of all men or if they be
visited after the visitation of all men then the lord hath
not sent me.
but if the lord make a new thing and the earth open her
mouth and swallow them up with all that appertain unto them
and they go down quick into the pit then ye shall understand
that these men have provoked the lord.
and it came to pass as he had made an end of speaking all
these words that the ground clave asunder that was under
them
and the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up and
their houses and all the men that appertained unto Korah and
all their goods.
they and all that appertained to them went down alive into
the pit and the earth closed upon them and they perished
from among the congregation.
and all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of
them for they said lest the earth swallow us up also.
and there came out a fire from the lord and consumed the two
hundred and fifty men that offered incense.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest that he take
up the censers out of the burning and scatter thou the fire
yonder for they are hallowed.
the censers of these sinners against their own souls let them
make them broad plates for a covering of the altar for they
offered them before the lord therefore they are hallowed and
they shall be a sign unto the children of Israel.
and Eleazar the priest took the brasen censers wherewith they
that were burnt had offered and they were made broad plates
for a covering of the altar
to be a memorial unto the children of Israel that no
stranger which is not of the seed of Aaron come near to
offer incense before the lord that he be not as Korah and as
his company as the lord said to him by the hand of Moses.
but on the morrow all the congregation of the children of
Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron saying ye
have killed the people of the lord.
and it came to pass when the congregation was gathered
against Moses and against Aaron that they looked toward the
tabernacle of the congregation and behold the cloud covered
it and the glory of the lord appeared.
and Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the
congregation.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
get you up from among this congregation that I may consume
them as in a moment. and they fell upon their faces.
and Moses said unto Aaron take a censer and put fire therein
from off the altar and put on incense and go quickly unto
the congregation and make an atonement for them for there is
wrath gone out from the lord the plague is begun.
and Aaron took as Moses commanded and ran into the midst of
the congregation and behold the plague was begun among the
people and he put on incense and made an atonement for the
people.
and he stood between the dead and the living and the plague
was stayed.
now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and
seven hundred beside them that died about the matter of
Korah.
and Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation and the plague was stayed.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and take of every one of
them a rod according to the house of their fathers of all
their princes according to the house of their fathers twelve
rods write thou every man s name upon his rod.
and thou shalt write Aaron s name upon the rod of Levi for
one rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.
and thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the
congregation before the testimony where I will meet with you.
and it shall come to pass that the man s rod whom I shall
choose shall blossom and I will make to cease from me the
murmurings of the children of Israel whereby they murmur
against you.
and Moses spake unto the children of Israel and every one of
their princes gave him a rod apiece for each prince one
according to their fathers houses even twelve rods and the
rod of Aaron was among their rods.
and Moses laid up the rods before the lord in the tabernacle
of witness.
and it came to pass that on the morrow Moses went into the
tabernacle of witness and behold the rod of Aaron for the
house of Levi was budded and brought forth buds and bloomed
blossoms and yielded almonds.
and Moses brought out all the rods from before the lord unto
all the children of Israel and they looked and took every
man his rod.
and the lord said unto Moses bring Aaron s rod again before
the testimony to be kept for a token against the rebels and
thou shalt quite take away their murmurings from me that they
die not.
and Moses did so as the lord commanded him so did he.
and the children of Israel spake unto Moses saying behold
we die we perish we all perish.
whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the
lord shall die shall we be consumed with dying?
and the lord said unto Aaron thou and thy sons and thy
father s house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the
sanctuary and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the
iniquity of your priesthood.
and thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi the tribe of thy
father bring thou with thee that they may be joined unto
thee and minister unto thee but thou and thy sons with thee
shall minister before the tabernacle of witness.
and they shall keep thy charge and the charge of all the
tabernacle only they shall not come nigh the vessels of the
sanctuary and the altar that Neither they nor ye also die.
and they shall be joined unto thee and keep the charge of the
tabernacle of the congregation for all the service of the
tabernacle and a stranger shall not come nigh unto you.
and ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary and the charge
of the altar that there be no wrath any more upon the
children of Israel.
and I behold I have taken your brethren the Levites from
among the children of Israel to you they are given as a gift
for the lord to do the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation.
therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest s
office for everything of the altar and within the vail and
ye shall serve I have given your priest s office unto you as
a service of gift and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be
put to death.
and the lord spake unto Aaron behold I also have given thee
the charge of mine heave offerings of all the hallowed things
of the children of Israel unto thee have I given them by
reason of the anointing and to thy sons by an ordinance for
ever.
this shall be thine of the most holy things reserved from the
fire every oblation of their s every meat offering of
their s and every Sin offering of their s and every trespass
offering of their s which they shall render unto me shall be
most holy for thee and for thy sons.
in the most holy place shalt thou eat it every Male shall eat
it it shall be holy unto thee.
and this is thine the heave offering of their gift with all
the wave offerings of the children of Israel I have given
them unto thee and to thy sons and to thy daughters with
thee by a statute for ever every one that is clean in thy
house shall eat of it.
all the best of the oil and all the best of the wine and of
the wheat the firstfruits of them which they shall offer unto
the lord them have I given thee.
and whatsoever is first ripe in the land which they shall
bring unto the lord shall be thine every one that is clean
in thine house shall eat of it.
every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine.
every thing that openeth the matrix in all flesh which they
bring unto the lord whether it be of men or beasts shall be
thine nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou surely
redeem and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem.
and those that are to be redeemed from a month old shalt thou
redeem according to thine estimation for the money of five
shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary which is twenty
gerahs.
but the firstling of a cow or the firstling of a sheep or
the firstling of a goat thou shalt not redeem they are holy
thou shalt sprinkle their blood upon the altar and shalt burn
their fat for an offering made by fire for a sweet savour
unto the lord.
and the flesh of them shall be thine as the wave breast and
as the right shoulder are thine.
all the heave offerings of the holy things which the children
of Israel offer unto the lord have I given thee and thy sons
and thy daughters with thee by a statute for ever it is a
covenant of salt for ever before the lord unto thee and to thy
seed with thee.
and the lord spake unto Aaron thou shalt have no inheritance
in their land Neither shalt thou have any part among them I
Am thy part and thine inheritance among the children of
Israel.
and behold I have given the children of Levi all the tenth
in Israel for an inheritance for their service which they
serve even the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.
Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the
tabernacle of the congregation lest they bear Sin and die.
but the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation and they shall bear their iniquity it shall be
a statute for ever throughout your generations that among the
children of Israel they have no inheritance.
but the tithes of the children of Israel which they offer as
an heave offering unto the lord I have given to the Levites
to inherit therefore I have said unto them among the
children of Israel they shall have no inheritance.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
thus speak unto the Levites and say unto them when ye take
of the children of Israel the tithes which I have given you
from them for your inheritance then ye shall offer up an
heave offering of it for the lord even a tenth part of the
tithe.
and this your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you as
though it were the corn of the threshingfloor and as the
fulness of the winepress.
thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the lord of
all your tithes which ye receive of the children of Israel
and ye shall give thereof the lord s heave offering to Aaron
the priest.
out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of
the lord of all the best thereof even the hallowed part
thereof out of it.
therefore thou shalt say unto them when ye have heaved the
best thereof from it then it shall be counted unto the
Levites as the increase of the threshingfloor and as the
increase of the winepress.
and ye shall eat it in every place ye and your households
for it is your reward for your service in the tabernacle of
the congregation.
and ye shall bear no Sin by reason of it when ye have heaved
from it the best of it Neither shall ye pollute the holy
things of the children of Israel lest ye die.
and the lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying
this is the ordinance of the law which the lord hath
commanded saying speak unto the children of Israel that
they bring thee a red heifer without spot wherein is no
blemish and upon which never came yoke
and ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest that he may
bring her forth without the camp and one shall slay her
before his face
and Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his
finger and sprinkle of her blood directly before the
tabernacle of the congregation seven times
and one shall burn the heifer in his sight her skin and her
flesh and her blood with her dung shall he burn
and the priest shall take cedar wood and hyssop and scarlet
and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.
then the priest shall wash his clothes and he shall bathe his
flesh in water and afterward he shall come into the camp and
the priest shall be unclean until the even.
and he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water and
bathe his flesh in water and shall be unclean until the even.
and a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the
heifer and lay them up without the camp in a clean place and
it shall be kept for the congregation of the children of
Israel for a water of separation it is a purification for
Sin.
and he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his
clothes and be unclean until the even and it shall be unto
the children of Israel and unto the stranger that sojourneth
among them for a statute for ever.
he that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean
seven days.
he shall purify himself with it on the third day and on the
seventh day he shall be clean but if he purify not himself
the third day then the seventh day he shall not be clean.
whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead and
purifieth not himself defileth the tabernacle of the lord
and that soul shall be cut off from Israel because the water
of separation was not sprinkled upon him he shall be unclean
his uncleanness is yet upon him.
this is the law when a man dieth in a tent all that come
into the tent and all that is in the tent shall be unclean
seven days.
and every open vessel which hath no covering bound upon it
is unclean.
and whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the
open fields or a dead body or a bone of a man or a grave
shall be unclean seven days.
and for an unclean person they shall take of the ashes of the
burnt heifer of purification for Sin and running water shall
be put thereto in a vessel
and a clean person shall take hyssop and dip it in the water
and sprinkle it upon the tent and upon all the vessels and
upon the persons that were there and upon him that touched a
bone or one slain or one dead or a grave
and the clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the
third day and on the seventh day and on the seventh day he
shall purify himself and wash his clothes and bathe himself
in water and shall be clean at even.
but the man that shall be unclean and shall not purify
himself that soul shall be cut off from among the
congregation because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the
lord the water of separation hath not been sprinkled upon
him he is unclean.
and it shall be a perpetual statute unto them that he that
sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash his clothes and
he that toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean
until even.
and whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean
and the soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.
then came the children of Israel even the whole congregation
into the desert of Zin in the first month and the people
abode in Kadesh and Miriam died there and was buried there.
and there was no water for the congregation and they gathered
themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.
and the people chode with Moses and spake saying would God
that we had died when our brethren died before the lord
and why have ye brought up the congregation of the lord into
this wilderness that we and our cattle should die there?
and wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt to
bring us in unto this evil place? it is no place of seed or
of figs or of vines or of pomegranates Neither is there any
water to drink.
and Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly
unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation and they
fell upon their faces and the glory of the lord appeared unto
them.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
take the rod and gather thou the assembly together thou and
Aaron thy brother and speak ye unto the rock before their
eyes and it shall give forth his water and thou shalt bring
forth to them water out of the rock so thou shalt give the
congregation and their beasts drink.
and Moses took the rod from before the lord as he commanded
him.
and Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before
the rock and he said unto them hear now ye rebels must we
fetch you water out of this rock?
and Moses lifted up his hand and with his rod he smote the
rock twice and the water came out abundantly and the
congregation drank and their beasts also.
and the lord spake unto Moses and Aaron because ye believed
me not to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel
therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land
which I have given them.
this is the water of Meribah because the children of Israel
strove with the lord and he was sanctified in them.
and Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom
thus saith thy brother Israel thou knowest all the travail
that hath befallen us
how our fathers went down into Egypt and we have dwelt in
Egypt a long time and the Egyptians vexed us and our
fathers
and when we cried unto the lord he heard our voice and sent
an angel and hath brought us forth out of Egypt and behold
we are in Kadesh a city in the uttermost of thy border
let us pass I pray thee through thy country we will not
pass through the fields or through the vineyards Neither
will we drink of the water of the wells we will go by the
king s high way we will not turn to the right hand nor to the
left until we have passed thy borders.
and Edom said unto him thou shalt not pass by me lest I come
out against thee with the sword.
and the children of Israel said unto him we will go by the
high way and if I and my cattle drink of thy water then I
will pay for it I will only without doing anything else go
through on my feet.
and he said thou shalt not go through. and Edom came out
against him with Much people and with a strong hand.
thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border
wherefore Israel turned away from him.
and the children of Israel even the whole congregation
journeyed from Kadesh and came unto mount Hor.
and the lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor by the
coast of the land of Edom saying
Aaron shall be gathered unto his people for he shall not
enter into the land which I have given unto the children of
Israel because ye rebelled against my word at the water of
Meribah.
take Aaron and Eleazar his son and bring them up unto mount
Hor
and strip Aaron of his garments and put them upon Eleazar his
son and Aaron shall be gathered unto his people and shall
die there.
and Moses did as the lord commanded and they went up into
mount Hor in the sight of all the congregation.
and Moses stripped Aaron of his garments and put them upon
Eleazar his son and Aaron died there in the top of the mount
and Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount.
and when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead they
mourned for Aaron thirty days even all the house of Israel.
and when king Arad the Canaanite which dwelt in the south
heard tell that Israel came by the way of the spies then he
fought against Israel and took some of them prisoners.
and Israel vowed a vow unto the lord and said if thou wilt
indeed deliver this people into my hand then I will utterly
destroy their cities.
and the lord hearkened to the voice of Israel and delivered
up the Canaanites and they utterly destroyed them and their
cities and he called the name of the place Hormah.
and they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the red sea
to compass the land of Edom and the soul of the people was
Much discouraged because of the way.
and the people spake against God and against Moses wherefore
have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness?
for there is no bread Neither is there any water and our
soul loatheth this light bread.
and the lord sent fiery serpents among the people and they
bit the people and Much people of Israel died.
therefore the people came to Moses and said we have sinned
for we have spoken against the lord and against thee pray
unto the lord that he take away the serpents from us. and
Moses prayed for the people.
and the lord said unto Moses make thee a fiery serpent and
set it upon a pole and it shall come to pass that every one
that is bitten when he looketh upon it shall live.
and Moses made a serpent of brass and put it upon a pole and
it came to pass that if a serpent had bitten any man when he
beheld the serpent of brass he lived.
and the children of Israel set forward and pitched in Oboth.
and they journeyed from Oboth and pitched at Ijeabarim in
the wilderness which is before Moab toward the sunrising.
from thence they removed and pitched in the valley of Zared.
from thence they removed and pitched on the other side of
Arnon which is in the wilderness that cometh out of the
coasts of the Amorites for Arnon is the border of Moab
between Moab and the Amorites.
wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the lord what
he did in the red sea and in the brooks of Arnon
and at the stream of the brooks that goeth down to the
dwelling of Ar and lieth upon the border of Moab.
and from thence they went to Beer that is the well whereof
the lord spake unto Moses gather the people together and I
will give them water.
then Israel sang this song spring up O well sing ye unto
it
the princes digged the well the nobles of the people digged
it by the direction of the lawgiver with their staves. and
from the wilderness they went to Mattanah
and from Mattanah to Nahaliel and from Nahaliel to Bamoth
and from Bamoth in the valley that is in the country of Moab
to the top of Pisgah which looketh toward Jeshimon.
and Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites
saying
let me pass through thy land we will not turn into the
fields or into the vineyards we will not drink of the waters
of the well but we will go along by the king s high way
until we be past thy borders.
and Sihon would not suffer Israel to pass through his border
but Sihon gathered all his people together and went out
against Israel into the wilderness and he came to Jahaz and
fought against Israel.
and Israel smote him with the edge of the sword and possessed
his land from Arnon unto Jabbok even unto the children of
Ammon for the border of the children of Ammon was strong.
and Israel took all these cities and Israel dwelt in all the
cities of the Amorites in Heshbon and in all the villages
thereof.
for Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites
who had fought against the former king of Moab and taken all
his land out of his hand even unto Arnon.
wherefore they that speak in proverbs say come into Heshbon
let the city of Sihon be built and prepared
for there is a fire gone out of Heshbon a flame from the city
of Sihon it hath consumed Ar of Moab and the lords of the
high places of Arnon.
woe to thee Moab thou art undone O people of Chemosh he
hath given his sons that escaped and his daughters into
captivity unto Sihon king of the Amorites.
we have shot at them Heshbon is perished even unto Dibon and
we have laid them waste even unto Nophah which reacheth unto
Medeba.
thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.
and Moses sent to spy out Jaazer and they took the villages
thereof and drove out the Amorites that were there.
and they turned and went up by the way of Bashan and Og the
king of Bashan went out against them he and all his people
to the battle at Edrei.
and the lord said unto Moses fear him not for I have
delivered him into thy hand and all his people and his land
and thou shalt do to him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the
Amorites which dwelt at Heshbon.
so they smote him and his sons and all his people until
there was none left him alive and they possessed his land.
and the children of Israel set forward and pitched in the
plains of Moab on this side Jordan by Jericho.
and Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to
the Amorites.
and Moab was sore afraid of the people because they were
many and Moab was distressed because of the children of
Israel.
and Moab said unto the elders of Midian now shall this
company lick up all that are round about us as the ox licketh
up the grass of the field. and Balak the son of Zippor was
king of the Moabites at that time.
he sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of Beor to
Pethor which is by the river of the land of the children of
his people to call him saying behold there is a people
come out from Egypt behold they cover the face of the earth
and they abide over against me
come now therefore I pray thee curse me this people for
they are too Mighty for me peradventure I shall prevail that
we may smite them and that I may drive them out of the land
for I wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed and he whom
thou cursest is cursed.
and the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with
the rewards of divination in their hand and they came unto
Balaam and spake unto him the words of Balak.
and he said unto them lodge here this night and I will bring
you word again as the lord shall speak unto me and the
princes of Moab abode with Balaam.
and God came unto Balaam and said what men are these with
thee?
and Balaam said unto God Balak the son of Zippor king of
Moab hath sent unto me saying
behold there is a people come out of Egypt which covereth
the face of the earth come now curse me them peradventure I
shall be able to overcome them and drive them out.
and God said unto Balaam thou shalt not go with them thou
shalt not curse the people for they are blessed.
and Balaam rose up in the morning and said unto the princes
of Balak get you into your land for the lord refuseth to
give me leave to go with you.
and the princes of Moab rose up and they went unto Balak and
said Balaam refuseth to come with us.
and Balak sent yet again princes more and more honourable
than they.
and they came to Balaam and said to him thus saith Balak the
son of Zippor let nothing I pray thee hinder thee from
coming unto me
for I will promote thee unto very great honour and I will do
whatsoever thou sayest unto me come therefore I pray thee
curse me this people.
and Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Balak if
Balak would give me his house full of Silver and gold I
cannot go beyond the word of the lord my God to do less or
more.
now therefore I pray you tarry ye also here this night that
I may know what the lord will say unto me more.
and God came unto Balaam at night and said unto him if the
men come to call thee rise up and go with them but yet the
word which I shall say unto thee that shalt thou do.
and Balaam rose up in the morning and saddled his ass and
went with the princes of Moab.
and God s anger was kindled because he went and the angel of
the lord stood in the way for an adversary against him. now he
was riding upon his ass and his two servants were with him.
and the ass saw the angel of the lord standing in the way and
his sword drawn in his hand and the ass turned aside out of
the way and went into the field and Balaam smote the ass to
turn her into the way.
but the angel of the lord stood in a path of the vineyards a
wall being on this side and a wall on that side.
and when the ass saw the angel of the lord she thrust herself
unto the wall and crushed Balaam s foot against the wall and
he smote her again.
and the angel of the lord went further and stood in a narrow
place where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to
the left.
and when the ass saw the angel of the lord she fell down
under Balaam and Balaam s anger was kindled and he smote the
ass with a staff.
and the lord opened the mouth of the ass and she said unto
Balaam what have I done unto thee that thou hast smitten me
these three times?
and Balaam said unto the ass because thou hast mocked me I
would there were a sword in mine hand for now would I kill
thee.
and the ass said unto Balaam Am not I thine ass upon which
thou hast ridden ever since I was thine unto this day? was I
ever wont to do so unto thee? and he said nay.
then the lord opened the eyes of Balaam and he saw the angel
of the lord standing in the way and his sword drawn in his
hand and he bowed down his head and fell flat on his face.
and the angel of the lord said unto him wherefore hast thou
smitten thine ass these three times? behold I went out to
withstand thee because thy way is perverse before me
and the ass saw me and turned from me these three times
unless she had turned from me surely now also I had slain
thee and saved her alive.
and Balaam said unto the angel of the lord I have sinned for
I knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me now
therefore if it displease thee I will get me back again.
and the angel of the lord said unto Balaam go with the men
but only the word that I shall speak unto thee that thou
shalt speak. so Balaam went with the princes of Balak.
and when Balak heard that Balaam was come he went out to meet
him unto a city of Moab which is in the border of Arnon
which is in the utmost coast.
and Balak said unto Balaam did I not earnestly send unto thee
to call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? Am I not able
indeed to promote thee to honour?
and Balaam said unto Balak lo I Am come unto thee have I
now any power at all to say any thing? the word that God
putteth in my mouth that shall I speak.
and Balaam went with Balak and they came unto Kirjathhuzoth.
and Balak offered oxen and sheep and sent to Balaam and to
the princes that were with him.
and it came to pass on the morrow that Balak took Balaam and
brought him up into the high places of Baal that thence he
might see the utmost part of the people.
and Balaam said unto Balak build me here seven altars and
prepare me here seven oxen and seven rams.
and Balak did as Balaam had spoken and Balak and Balaam
offered on every altar a bullock and a Ram.
and Balaam said unto Balak stand by thy burnt offering and I
will go peradventure the lord will come to meet me and
whatsoever he sheweth me I will tell thee. and he went to an
high place.
and God met Balaam and he said unto him I have prepared
seven altars and I have offered upon every altar a bullock
and a Ram.
and the lord put a word in Balaam s mouth and said return
unto Balak and thus thou shalt speak.
and he returned unto him and lo he stood by his burnt
sacrifice he and all the princes of Moab.
and he took up his parable and said Balak the king of Moab
hath brought me from Aram out of the mountains of the east
saying come curse me Jacob and come defy Israel.
how shall I curse whom God hath not cursed? or how shall I
defy whom the lord hath not defied?
for from the top of the rocks I see him and from the hills I
behold him lo the people shall dwell alone and shall not be
reckoned among the nations.
who can count the dust of Jacob and the number of the fourth
part of Israel? let me die the death of the righteous and let
my last end be like his
and Balak said unto Balaam what hast thou done unto me? I
took thee to curse mine enemies and behold thou hast
blessed them altogether.
and he answered and said must I not take heed to speak that
which the lord hath put in my mouth?
and Balak said unto him come I pray thee with me unto
another place from whence thou mayest see them thou shalt
see but the utmost part of them and shalt not see them all
and curse me them from thence.
and he brought him into the field of Zophim to the top of
Pisgah and built seven altars and offered a bullock and a
Ram on every altar.
and he said unto Balak stand here by thy burnt offering
while I meet the lord yonder.
and the lord met Balaam and put a word in his mouth and
said go again unto Balak and say thus.
and when he came to him behold he stood by his burnt
offering and the princes of Moab with him. and Balak said
unto him what hath the lord spoken?
and he took up his parable and said rise up Balak and
hear hearken unto me thou son of Zippor
God is not a man that he should lie Neither the son of man
that he should repent hath he said and shall he not do it?
or hath he spoken and shall he not make it good?
behold I have received commandment to bless and he hath
blessed and I cannot reverse it.
he hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob Neither hath he seen
perverseness in Israel the lord his God is with him and the
shout of a king is among them.
God brought them out of Egypt he hath as it were the strength
of an unicorn.
surely there is no enchantment against Jacob Neither is there
any divination against Israel according to this time it shall
be said of Jacob and of Israel what hath God wrought
behold the people shall rise up as a great lion and lift up
himself as a young lion he shall not lie down until he eat of
the prey and drink the blood of the slain.
and Balak said unto Balaam Neither curse them at all nor
bless them at all.
but Balaam answered and said unto Balak told not I thee
saying all that the lord speaketh that I must do?
and Balak said unto Balaam come I pray thee I will bring
thee unto another place peradventure it will please God that
thou mayest curse me them from thence.
and Balak brought Balaam unto the top of Peor that looketh
toward Jeshimon.
and Balaam said unto Balak build me here seven altars and
prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.
and Balak did as Balaam had said and offered a bullock and a
Ram on every altar.
and when Balaam saw that it pleased the lord to bless Israel
he went not as at other times to seek for enchantments but
he set his face toward the wilderness.
and Balaam lifted up his eyes and he saw Israel abiding in
his tents according to their tribes and the spirit of God
came upon him.
and he took up his parable and said Balaam the son of Beor
hath said and the man whose eyes are open hath said
he hath said which heard the words of God which saw the
vision of the almighty falling into a trance but having his
eyes open
how goodly are thy tents O Jacob and thy tabernacles O
Israel
as the valleys are they spread forth as gardens by the
river s side as the trees of lign aloes which the lord hath
planted and as cedar trees beside the waters.
he shall pour the water out of his buckets and his seed shall
be in many waters and his king shall be higher than Agag and
his kingdom shall be exalted.
God brought him forth out of Egypt he hath as it were the
strength of an unicorn he shall eat up the nations his
enemies and shall break their bones and pierce them through
with his arrows.
he couched he lay down as a lion and as a great lion who
shall stir him up? blessed is he that blesseth thee and
cursed is he that curseth thee.
and Balak s anger was kindled against Balaam and he smote his
hands together and Balak said unto Balaam I called thee to
curse mine enemies and behold thou hast altogether blessed
them these three times.
therefore now flee thou to thy place I thought to promote
thee unto great honour but lo the lord hath kept thee back
from honour.
and Balaam said unto Balak spake I not also to thy messengers
which thou sentest unto me saying
if Balak would give me his house full of Silver and gold I
cannot go beyond the commandment of the lord to do either
good or bad of mine own mind but what the lord saith that
will I speak?
and now behold I go unto my people come therefore and I
will advertise thee what this people shall do to thy people in
the latter days.
and he took up his parable and said Balaam the son of Beor
hath said and the man whose eyes are open hath said
he hath said which heard the words of God and knew the
knowledge of the most high which saw the vision of the
almighty falling into a trance but having his eyes open
I shall see him but not now I shall behold him but not
nigh there shall come a star out of Jacob and a sceptre
shall rise out of Israel and shall smite the corners of Moab
and destroy all the children of Sheth.
and Edom shall be a possession Seir also shall be a
possession for his enemies and Israel shall do valiantly.
out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion and shall
destroy him that remaineth of the city.
and when he looked on Amalek he took up his parable and
said Amalek was the first of the nations but his latter end
shall be that he perish for ever.
and he looked on the Kenites and took up his parable and
said strong is thy dwellingplace and thou puttest thy nest
in a rock.
nevertheless the Kenite shall be wasted until Asshur shall
carry thee away captive.
and he took up his parable and said alas who shall live
when God doeth this
and ships shall come from the coast of Chittim and shall
afflict Asshur and shall afflict Eber and he also shall
perish for ever.
and Balaam rose up and went and returned to his place and
Balak also went his way.
and Israel abode in Shittim and the people began to commit
whoredom with the daughters of Moab.
and they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods
and the people did eat and bowed down to their gods.
and Israel joined himself unto Baalpeor and the anger of the
lord was kindled against Israel.
and the lord said unto Moses take all the heads of the
people and hang them up before the lord against the sun that
the fierce anger of the lord may be turned away from Israel.
and Moses said unto the judges of Israel slay ye every one
his men that were joined unto Baalpeor.
and behold one of the children of Israel came and brought
unto his brethren a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses
and in the sight of all the congregation of the children of
Israel who were weeping before the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation.
and when Phinehas the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the
priest saw it he rose up from among the congregation and
took a javelin in his hand
and he went after the man of Israel into the tent and thrust
both of them through the man of Israel and the woman through
her belly. so the plague was stayed from the children of
Israel.
and those that died in the plague were twenty and four
thousand.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
Phinehas the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest
hath turned my wrath away from the children of Israel while
he was zealous for my sake among them that I consumed not the
children of Israel in my jealousy.
wherefore say behold I give unto him my covenant of peace
and he shall have it and his seed after him even the
covenant of an everlasting priesthood because he was zealous
for his God and made an atonement for the children of Israel.
now the name of the Israelite that was slain even that was
slain with the Midianitish woman was Zimri the son of Salu
a prince of a chief house among the Simeonites.
and the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was
Cozbi the daughter of Zur he was head over a people and of
a chief house in Midian.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
vex the Midianites and smite them
for they vex you with their wiles wherewith they have
beguiled you in the matter of Peor and in the matter of
Cozbi the daughter of a prince of Midian their sister which
was slain in the day of the plague for Peor s sake.
and it came to pass after the plague that the lord spake unto
Moses and unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest saying
take the sum of all the congregation of the children of
Israel from twenty years old and upward throughout their
fathers house all that are able to go to war in Israel.
and Moses and Eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains
of Moab by Jordan near Jericho saying
take the sum of the people from twenty years old and upward
as the lord commanded Moses and the children of Israel which
went forth out of the land of Egypt.
Reuben the eldest son of Israel the children of Reuben
Hanoch of whom cometh the family of the Hanochites of Pallu
the family of the Palluites
of Hezron the family of the Hezronites of Carmi the family
of the Carmites.
these are the families of the Reubenites and they that were
numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven
hundred and thirty.
and the sons of Pallu Eliab.
and the sons of Eliab Nemuel and Dathan and Abiram. this is
that Dathan and Abiram which were famous in the congregation
who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of
Korah when they strove against the lord
and the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up together
with Korah when that company died what time the fire
devoured two hundred and fifty men and they became a sign.
notwithstanding the children of Korah died not.
the sons of Simeon after their families of Nemuel the family
of the Nemuelites of Jamin the family of the Jaminites of
Jachin the family of the Jachinites
of Zerah the family of the Zarhites of Shaul the family of
the Shaulites.
these are the families of the Simeonites twenty and two
thousand and two hundred.
the children of Gad after their families of Zephon the
family of the Zephonites of Haggi the family of the
Haggites of Shuni the family of the Shunites
of Ozni the family of the Oznites of Eri the family of the
Erites
of Arod the family of the Arodites of Areli the family of
the Arelites.
these are the families of the children of Gad according to
those that were numbered of them forty thousand and five
hundred.
the sons of Judah were Er and Onan and Er and Onan died in
the land of Canaan.
and the sons of Judah after their families were of Shelah
the family of the Shelanites of Pharez the family of the
Pharzites of Zerah the family of the Zarhites.
and the sons of Pharez were of Hezron the family of the
Hezronites of Hamul the family of the Hamulites.
these are the families of Judah according to those that were
numbered of them threescore and sixteen thousand and five
hundred.
of the sons of Issachar after their families of Tola the
family of the Tolaites of Pua the family of the Punites
of Jashub the family of the Jashubites of Shimron the
family of the Shimronites.
these are the families of Issachar according to those that
were numbered of them threescore and four thousand and three
hundred.
of the sons of Zebulun after their families of Sered the
family of the Sardites of Elon the family of the Elonites
of Jahleel the family of the Jahleelites.
these are the families of the Zebulunites according to those
that were numbered of them threescore thousand and five
hundred.
the sons of Joseph after their families were Manasseh and
Ephraim.
of the sons of Manasseh of Machir the family of the
Machirites and Machir begat Gilead of Gilead come the family
of the Gileadites.
these are the sons of Gilead of Jeezer the family of the
Jeezerites of Helek the family of the Helekites
and of Asriel the family of the Asrielites and of Shechem
the family of the Shechemites
and of Shemida the family of the Shemidaites and of Hepher
the family of the Hepherites.
and Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons but daughters
and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah and
Noah Hoglah Milcah and Tirzah.
these are the families of Manasseh and those that were
numbered of them fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.
these are the sons of Ephraim after their families of
Shuthelah the family of the Shuthalhites of Becher the
family of the Bachrites of Tahan the family of the
Tahanites.
and these are the sons of Shuthelah of Eran the family of
the Eranites.
these are the families of the sons of Ephraim according to
those that were numbered of them thirty and two thousand and
five hundred. these are the sons of Joseph after their
families.
the sons of Benjamin after their families of Bela the family
of the Belaites of Ashbel the family of the Ashbelites of
Ahiram the family of the Ahiramites
of Shupham the family of the Shuphamites of Hupham the
family of the Huphamites.
and the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman of Ard the family
of the Ardites and of Naaman the family of the Naamites.
these are the sons of Benjamin after their families and they
that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and
six hundred.
these are the sons of Dan after their families of Shuham the
family of the Shuhamites. these are the families of Dan after
their families.
all the families of the Shuhamites according to those that
were numbered of them were threescore and four thousand and
four hundred.
of the children of Asher after their families of Jimna the
family of the Jimnites of Jesui the family of the Jesuites
of Beriah the family of the Beriites.
of the sons of Beriah of Heber the family of the Heberites
of Malchiel the family of the Malchielites.
and the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarah.
these are the families of the sons of Asher according to those
that were numbered of them who were fifty and three thousand
and four hundred.
of the sons of Naphtali after their families of Jahzeel the
family of the Jahzeelites of Guni the family of the Gunites
of Jezer the family of the Jezerites of Shillem the family
of the Shillemites.
these are the families of Naphtali according to their
families and they that were numbered of them were forty and
five thousand and four hundred.
these were the numbered of the children of Israel six hundred
thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance
according to the number of names.
to many thou shalt give the more inheritance and to few thou
shalt give the less inheritance to every one shall his
inheritance be given according to those that were numbered of
him.
notwithstanding the land shall be divided by Lot according to
the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.
according to the Lot shall the possession thereof be divided
between many and few.
and these are they that were numbered of the Levites after
their families of Gershon the family of the Gershonites of
Kohath the family of the Kohathites of Merari the family of
the Merarites.
these are the families of the Levites the family of the
Libnites the family of the Hebronites the family of the
Mahlites the family of the Mushites the family of the
Korathites. and Kohath begat Amram.
and the name of Amram s wife was Jochebed the daughter of
Levi whom her mother bare to Levi in Egypt and she bare unto
Amram Aaron and Moses and Miriam their sister.
and unto Aaron was born Nadab and Abihu Eleazar and
Ithamar.
and Nadab and Abihu died when they offered strange fire
before the lord.
and those that were numbered of them were twenty and three
thousand all males from a month old and upward for they were
not numbered among the children of Israel because there was
no inheritance given them among the children of Israel.
these are they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the
priest who numbered the children of Israel in the plains of
Moab by Jordan near Jericho.
but among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and
Aaron the priest numbered when they numbered the children of
Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.
for the lord had said of them they shall surely die in the
wilderness. and there was not left a man of them save Caleb
the son of Jephunneh and Joshua the son of Nun.
then came the daughters of Zelophehad the son of Hepher the
son of Gilead the son of Machir the son of Manasseh of the
families of Manasseh the son of Joseph and these are the
names of his daughters Mahlah Noah and Hoglah and Milcah
and Tirzah.
and they stood before Moses and before Eleazar the priest
and before the princes and all the congregation by the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation saying
our father died in the wilderness and he was not in the
company of them that gathered themselves together against the
lord in the company of Korah but died in his own Sin and had
no sons.
why should the name of our father be done away from among his
family because he hath no son? give unto us therefore a
possession among the brethren of our father.
and Moses brought their cause before the lord.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
the daughters of Zelophehad speak right thou shalt surely
give them a possession of an inheritance among their father s
brethren and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their father
to pass unto them.
and thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel saying if a
man die and have no son then ye shall cause his inheritance
to pass unto his daughter.
and if he have no daughter then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his brethren.
and if he have no brethren then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his father s brethren.
and if his father have no brethren then ye shall give his
inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his
family and he shall possess it and it shall be unto the
children of Israel a statute of judgment as the lord
commanded Moses.
and the lord said unto Moses get thee up into this mount
Abarim and see the land which I have given unto the children
of Israel.
and when thou hast seen it thou also shalt be gathered unto
thy people as Aaron thy brother was gathered.
for ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of Zin
in the strife of the congregation to sanctify me at the water
before their eyes that is the water of Meribah in Kadesh in
the wilderness of Zin.
and Moses spake unto the lord saying
let the lord the God of the spirits of all flesh set a man
over the congregation
which may go out before them and which may go in before them
and which may lead them out and which may bring them in that
the congregation of the lord be not as sheep which have no
Shepherd.
and the lord said unto Moses take thee Joshua the son of Nun
a man in whom is the spirit and lay thine hand upon him
and set him before Eleazar the priest and before all the
congregation and give him a charge in their sight.
and thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him that all the
congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient.
and he shall stand before Eleazar the priest who shall ask
counsel for him after the judgment of Urim before the lord at
his word shall they go out and at his word they shall come
in both he and all the children of Israel with him even all
the congregation.
and Moses did as the lord commanded him and he took Joshua
and set him before Eleazar the priest and before all the
congregation
and he laid his hands upon him and gave him a charge as the
lord commanded by the hand of Moses.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
command the children of Israel and say unto them my
offering and my bread for my sacrifices made by fire for a
sweet savour unto me shall ye observe to offer unto me in
their due season.
and thou shalt say unto them this is the offering made by
fire which ye shall offer unto the lord two lambs of the
first year without spot day by day for a continual burnt
offering.
the one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning and the other
lamb shalt thou offer at even
and a tenth part of an Ephah of flour for a meat offering
mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil.
it is a continual burnt offering which was ordained in mount
Sinai for a sweet savour a sacrifice made by fire unto the
lord.
and the drink offering thereof shall be the fourth part of an
hin for the one lamb in the holy place shalt thou cause the
strong wine to be poured unto the lord for a drink offering.
and the other lamb shalt thou offer at even as the meat
offering of the morning and as the drink offering thereof
thou shalt offer it a sacrifice made by fire of a sweet
savour unto the lord.
and on the sabbath day two lambs of the first year without
spot and two tenth deals of flour for a meat offering
mingled with oil and the drink offering thereof
this is the burnt offering of every sabbath beside the
continual burnt offering and his drink offering.
and in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt
offering unto the lord two young bullocks and one Ram seven
lambs of the first year without spot
and three tenth deals of flour for a meat offering mingled
with oil for one bullock and two tenth deals of flour for a
meat offering mingled with oil for one Ram
and a several tenth deal of flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering unto one lamb for a burnt offering of a sweet
savour a sacrifice made by fire unto the lord.
and their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto a
bullock and the third part of an hin unto a Ram and a fourth
part of an hin unto a lamb this is the burnt offering of
every month throughout the months of the year.
and one kid of the goats for a Sin offering unto the lord
shall be offered beside the continual burnt offering and his
drink offering.
and in the fourteenth day of the first month is the passover
of the lord.
and in the fifteenth day of this month is the feast seven
days shall unleavened bread be eaten.
in the first day shall be an holy convocation ye shall do no
manner of servile work therein
but ye shall offer a sacrifice made by fire for a burnt
offering unto the lord two young bullocks and one Ram and
seven lambs of the first year they shall be unto you without
blemish
and their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil
three tenth deals shall ye offer for a bullock and two tenth
deals for a Ram
a several tenth deal shalt thou offer for every lamb
throughout the seven lambs
and one goat for a Sin offering to make an atonement for you.
ye shall offer these beside the burnt offering in the morning
which is for a continual burnt offering.
after this manner ye shall offer daily throughout the seven
days the meat of the sacrifice made by fire of a sweet
savour unto the lord it shall be offered beside the continual
burnt offering and his drink offering.
and on the seventh day ye shall have an holy convocation ye
shall do no servile work.
also in the day of the firstfruits when ye bring a new meat
offering unto the lord after your weeks be out ye shall have
an holy convocation ye shall do no servile work
but ye shall offer the burnt offering for a sweet savour unto
the lord two young bullocks one Ram seven lambs of the
first year
and their meat offering of flour mingled with oil three tenth
deals unto one bullock two tenth deals unto one Ram
a several tenth deal unto one lamb throughout the seven
lambs
and one kid of the goats to make an atonement for you.
ye shall offer them beside the continual burnt offering and
his meat offering they shall be unto you without blemish
and their drink offerings.
and in the seventh month on the first day of the month ye
shall have an holy convocation ye shall do no servile work
it is a day of blowing the trumpets unto you.
and ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savour unto
the lord one young bullock one Ram and seven lambs of the
first year without blemish
and their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil
three tenth deals for a bullock and two tenth deals for a
Ram
and one tenth deal for one lamb throughout the seven lambs
and one kid of the goats for a Sin offering to make an
atonement for you
beside the burnt offering of the month and his meat offering
and the daily burnt offering and his meat offering and their
drink offerings according unto their manner for a sweet
savour a sacrifice made by fire unto the lord.
and ye shall have on the tenth day of this seventh month an
holy convocation and ye shall afflict your souls ye shall
not do any work therein
but ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the lord for a sweet
savour one young bullock one Ram and seven lambs of the
first year they shall be unto you without blemish
and their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil
three tenth deals to a bullock and two tenth deals to one
Ram
a several tenth deal for one lamb throughout the seven lambs
one kid of the goats for a Sin offering beside the Sin
offering of atonement and the continual burnt offering and
the meat offering of it and their drink offerings.
and on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an
holy convocation ye shall do no servile work and ye shall
keep a feast unto the lord seven days
and ye shall offer a burnt offering a sacrifice made by fire
of a sweet savour unto the lord thirteen young bullocks two
rams and fourteen lambs of the first year they shall be
without blemish
and their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil
three tenth deals unto every bullock of the thirteen bullocks
two tenth deals to each Ram of the two rams
and a several tenth deal to each lamb of the fourteen lambs
and one kid of the goats for a Sin offering beside the
continual burnt offering his meat offering and his drink
offering.
and on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks
two rams fourteen lambs of the first year without spot
and their meat offering and their drink offerings for the
bullocks for the rams and for the lambs shall be according
to their number after the manner
and one kid of the goats for a Sin offering beside the
continual burnt offering and the meat offering thereof and
their drink offerings.
and on the third day eleven bullocks two rams fourteen lambs
of the first year without blemish
and their meat offering and their drink offerings for the
bullocks for the rams and for the lambs shall be according
to their number after the manner
and one goat for a Sin offering beside the continual burnt
offering and his meat offering and his drink offering.
and on the fourth day Ten bullocks two rams and fourteen
lambs of the first year without blemish
their meat offering and their drink offerings for the
bullocks for the rams and for the lambs shall be according
to their number after the manner
and one kid of the goats for a Sin offering beside the
continual burnt offering his meat offering and his drink
offering.
and on the fifth day nine bullocks two rams and fourteen
lambs of the first year without spot
and their meat offering and their drink offerings for the
bullocks for the rams and for the lambs shall be according
to their number after the manner
and one goat for a Sin offering beside the continual burnt
offering and his meat offering and his drink offering.
and on the sixth day eight bullocks two rams and fourteen
lambs of the first year without blemish
and their meat offering and their drink offerings for the
bullocks for the rams and for the lambs shall be according
to their number after the manner
and one goat for a Sin offering beside the continual burnt
offering his meat offering and his drink offering.
and on the seventh day seven bullocks two rams and fourteen
lambs of the first year without blemish
and their meat offering and their drink offerings for the
bullocks for the rams and for the lambs shall be according
to their number after the manner
and one goat for a Sin offering beside the continual burnt
offering his meat offering and his drink offering.
on the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly ye shall do
no servile work therein
but ye shall offer a burnt offering a sacrifice made by fire
of a sweet savour unto the lord one bullock one Ram seven
lambs of the first year without blemish
their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullock
for the Ram and for the lambs shall be according to their
number after the manner
and one goat for a Sin offering beside the continual burnt
offering and his meat offering and his drink offering.
these things ye shall do unto the lord in your set feasts
beside your vows and your freewill offerings for your burnt
offerings and for your meat offerings and for your drink
offerings and for your peace offerings.
and Moses told the children of Israel according to all that
the lord commanded Moses.
and Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the
children of Israel saying this is the thing which the lord
hath commanded.
if a man vow a vow unto the lord or swear an oath to bind his
soul with a bond he shall not break his word he shall do
according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.
if a woman also vow a vow unto the lord and bind herself by a
bond being in her father s house in her youth
and her father hear her vow and her bond wherewith she hath
bound her soul and her father shall hold his peace at her
then all her vows shall stand and every bond wherewith she
hath bound her soul shall stand.
but if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth not
any of her vows or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her
soul shall stand and the lord shall forgive her because her
father disallowed her.
and if she had at all an husband when she vowed or uttered
ought out of her lips wherewith she bound her soul
and her husband heard it and held his peace at her in the day
that he heard it then her vows shall stand and her bonds
wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.
but if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it
then he shall make her vow which she vowed and that which she
uttered with her lips wherewith she bound her soul of none
effect and the lord shall forgive her.
but every vow of a widow and of her that is divorced
wherewith they have bound their souls shall stand against
her.
and if she vowed in her husband s house or bound her soul by
a bond with an oath
and her husband heard it and held his peace at her and
disallowed her not then all her vows shall stand and every
bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.
but if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he
heard them then whatsoever proceeded out of her lips
concerning her vows or concerning the bond of her soul shall
not stand her husband hath made them void and the lord shall
forgive her.
every vow and every binding oath to afflict the soul her
husband may establish it or her husband may make it void.
but if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day
to day then he establisheth all her vows or all her bonds
which are upon her he confirmeth them because he held his
peace at her in the day that he heard them.
but if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath
heard them then he shall bear her iniquity.
these are the statutes which the lord commanded Moses
between a man and his wife between the father and his
daughter being yet in her youth in her father s house.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites afterward
shalt thou be gathered unto thy people.
and Moses spake unto the people saying arm some of
yourselves unto the war and let them go against the
Midianites and avenge the lord of Midian.
of every tribe a thousand throughout all the tribes of
Israel shall ye send to the war.
so there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel a
thousand of every tribe twelve thousand armed for war.
and Moses sent them to the war a thousand of every tribe
them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest to the war
with the holy instruments and the trumpets to blow in his
hand.
and they warred against the Midianites as the lord commanded
Moses and they slew all the males.
and they slew the kings of Midian beside the rest of them
that were slain namely Evi and Rekem and Zur and Hur and
Reba five kings of Midian Balaam also the son of Beor they
slew with the sword.
and the children of Israel took all the women of Midian
captives and their little ones and took the spoil of all
their cattle and all their flocks and all their goods.
and they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt and all
their goodly castles with fire.
and they took all the spoil and all the prey both of men and
of beasts.
and they brought the captives and the prey and the spoil
unto Moses and Eleazar the priest and unto the congregation
of the children of Israel unto the camp at the plains of
Moab which are by Jordan near Jericho.
and Moses and Eleazar the priest and all the princes of the
congregation went forth to meet them without the camp.
and Moses was wroth with the officers of the host with the
captains over thousands and captains over hundreds which
came from the battle.
and Moses said unto them have ye saved all the women alive?
behold these caused the children of Israel through the
counsel of Balaam to commit trespass against the lord in the
matter of Peor and there was a plague among the congregation
of the lord.
now therefore kill every Male among the little ones and kill
every woman that hath known man by lying with him.
but all the women children that have not known a man by lying
with him keep alive for yourselves.
and do ye abide without the camp seven days whosoever hath
killed any person and whosoever hath touched any slain
purify both yourselves and your captives on the third day and
on the seventh day.
and purify all your raiment and all that is made of skins
and all work of goats hair and all things made of wood.
and Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to
the battle this is the ordinance of the law which the lord
commanded Moses
only the gold and the Silver the brass the Iron the tin
and the lead
every thing that may abide the fire ye shall make it go
through the fire and it shall be clean nevertheless it shall
be purified with the water of separation and all that abideth
not the fire ye shall make go through the water.
and ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day and ye
shall be clean and afterward ye shall come into the camp.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
take the sum of the prey that was taken both of man and of
beast thou and Eleazar the priest and the chief fathers of
the congregation
and divide the prey into two parts between them that took the
war upon them who went out to battle and between all the
congregation
and levy a tribute unto the lord of the men of war which went
out to battle one soul of five hundred both of the persons
and of the beeves and of the asses and of the sheep
take it of their half and give it unto Eleazar the priest
for an heave offering of the lord.
and of the children of Israel s half thou shalt take one
portion of fifty of the persons of the beeves of the asses
and of the flocks of all manner of beasts and give them unto
the Levites which keep the charge of the tabernacle of the
lord.
and Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the lord commanded
Moses.
and the booty being the rest of the prey which the men of war
had caught was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and
five thousand sheep
and threescore and twelve thousand beeves
and threescore and one thousand asses
and thirty and two thousand persons in all of women that had
not known man by lying with him.
and the half which was the portion of them that went out to
war was in number three hundred thousand and seven and thirty
thousand and five hundred sheep
and the lord s tribute of the sheep was six hundred and
threescore and fifteen.
and the beeves were thirty and six thousand of which the
lord s tribute was threescore and twelve.
and the asses were thirty thousand and five hundred of which
the lord s tribute was threescore and one.
and the persons were sixteen thousand of which the lord s
tribute was thirty and two persons.
and Moses gave the tribute which was the lord s heave
offering unto Eleazar the priest as the lord commanded
Moses.
and of the children of Israel s half which Moses divided from
the men that warred
 now the half that pertained unto the congregation was three
hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven thousand and
five hundred sheep
and thirty and six thousand beeves
and thirty thousand asses and five hundred
and sixteen thousand persons
even of the children of Israel s half Moses took one portion
of fifty both of man and of beast and gave them unto the
Levites which kept the charge of the tabernacle of the lord
as the lord commanded Moses.
and the officers which were over thousands of the host the
captains of thousands and captains of hundreds came near
unto Moses
and they said unto Moses thy servants have taken the sum of
the men of war which are under our charge and there lacketh
not one man of us.
we have therefore brought an oblation for the lord what every
man hath gotten of jewels of gold chains and bracelets
rings earrings and tablets to make an atonement for our
souls before the lord.
and Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them even
all wrought jewels.
and all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the
lord of the captains of thousands and of the captains of
hundreds was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty
shekels.
 for the men of war had taken spoil every man for himself.
and Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains
of thousands and of hundreds and brought it into the
tabernacle of the congregation for a memorial for the
children of Israel before the lord.
now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very
great multitude of cattle and when they saw the land of
Jazer and the land of Gilead that behold the place was a
place for cattle
the children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake
unto Moses and to Eleazar the priest and unto the princes of
the congregation saying
Ataroth and Dibon and Jazer and Nimrah and Heshbon and
Elealeh and Shebam and Nebo and Beon
even the country which the lord smote before the congregation
of Israel is a land for cattle and thy servants have cattle
wherefore said they if we have found grace in thy sight let
this land be given unto thy servants for a possession and
bring us not over Jordan.
and Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of
Reuben shall your brethren go to war and shall ye sit here?
and wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of
Israel from going over into the land which the lord hath given
them?
thus did your fathers when I sent them from Kadeshbarnea to
see the land.
for when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol and saw the
land they discouraged the heart of the children of Israel
that they should not go into the land which the lord had given
them.
and the lord s anger was kindled the same time and he sware
saying
surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt from twenty
years old and upward shall see the land which I sware unto
Abraham unto Isaac and unto Jacob because they have not
wholly followed me
save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite and Joshua the
son of Nun for they have wholly followed the lord.
and the lord s anger was kindled against Israel and he made
them wander in the wilderness forty years until all the
generation that had done evil in the sight of the lord was
consumed.
and behold ye are risen up in your fathers stead an
increase of sinful men to augment yet the fierce anger of the
lord toward Israel.
for if ye turn away from after him he will yet again leave
them in the wilderness and ye shall destroy all this people.
and they came near unto him and said we will build
sheepfolds here for our cattle and cities for our little
ones
but we ourselves will go ready armed before the children of
Israel until we have brought them unto their place and our
little ones shall dwell in the fenced cities because of the
inhabitants of the land.
we will not return unto our houses until the children of
Israel have inherited every man his inheritance.
for we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan or
forward because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side
Jordan eastward.
and Moses said unto them if ye will do this thing if ye will
go armed before the lord to war
and will go all of you armed over Jordan before the lord
until he hath driven out his enemies from before him
and the land be subdued before the lord then afterward ye
shall return and be guiltless before the lord and before
Israel and this land shall be your possession before the
lord.
but if ye will not do so behold ye have sinned against the
lord and be sure your Sin will find you out.
build you cities for your little ones and folds for your
sheep and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.
and the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto
Moses saying thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.
our little ones our wives our flocks and all our cattle
shall be there in the cities of Gilead
but thy servants will pass over every man armed for war
before the lord to battle as my lord saith.
so concerning them Moses commanded Eleazar the priest and
Joshua the son of Nun and the chief fathers of the tribes of
the children of Israel
and Moses said unto them if the children of Gad and the
children of Reuben will pass with you over Jordan every man
armed to battle before the lord and the land shall be
subdued before you then ye shall give them the land of Gilead
for a possession
but if they will not pass over with you armed they shall have
possessions among you in the land of Canaan.
and the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered
saying as the lord hath said unto thy servants so will we
do.
we will pass over armed before the lord into the land of
Canaan that the possession of our inheritance on this side
Jordan may be our s.
and Moses gave unto them even to the children of Gad and to
the children of Reuben and unto half the tribe of Manasseh
the son of Joseph the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites
and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan the land with the
cities thereof in the coasts even the cities of the country
round about.
and the children of Gad built Dibon and Ataroth and Aroer
and Atroth Shophan and Jaazer and Jogbehah
and Bethnimrah and Bethharan fenced cities and folds for
sheep.
and the children of Reuben built Heshbon and Elealeh and
Kirjathaim
and Nebo and Baalmeon their names being changed and
Shibmah and gave other names unto the cities which they
builded.
and the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead
and took it and dispossessed the Amorite which was in it.
and Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh and he
dwelt therein.
and Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof and called them Havothjair.
and Nobah went and took Kenath and the villages thereof and
called it Nobah after his own name.
these are the journeys of the children of Israel which went
forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies under the
hand of Moses and Aaron.
and Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys
by the commandment of the lord and these are their journeys
according to their goings out.
and they departed from Rameses in the first month on the
fifteenth day of the first month on the morrow after the
passover the children of Israel went out with an high hand in
the sight of all the Egyptians.
for the Egyptians buried all their firstborn which the lord
had smitten among them upon their gods also the lord executed
judgments.
and the children of Israel removed from Rameses and pitched
in Succoth.
and they departed from Succoth and pitched in Etham which is
in the edge of the wilderness.
and they removed from Etham and turned again unto Pihahiroth
which is before Baalzephon and they pitched before Migdol.
and they departed from before Pihahiroth and passed through
the midst of the sea into the wilderness and went three days
journey in the wilderness of Etham and pitched in Marah.
and they removed from Marah and came unto Elim and in Elim
were twelve fountains of water and threescore and Ten palm
trees and they pitched there.
and they removed from Elim and encamped by the red sea.
and they removed from the red sea and encamped in the
wilderness of Sin.
and they took their journey out of the wilderness of Sin and
encamped in Dophkah.
and they departed from Dophkah and encamped in Alush.
and they removed from Alush and encamped at Rephidim where
was no water for the people to drink.
and they departed from Rephidim and pitched in the wilderness
of Sinai.
and they removed from the desert of Sinai and pitched at
Kibrothhattaavah.
and they departed from Kibrothhattaavah and encamped at
Hazeroth.
and they departed from Hazeroth and pitched in Rithmah.
and they departed from Rithmah and pitched at Rimmonparez.
and they departed from Rimmonparez and pitched in Libnah.
and they removed from Libnah and pitched at Rissah.
and they journeyed from Rissah and pitched in Kehelathah.
and they went from Kehelathah and pitched in mount Shapher.
and they removed from mount Shapher and encamped in Haradah.
and they removed from Haradah and pitched in Makheloth.
and they removed from Makheloth and encamped at Tahath.
and they departed from Tahath and pitched at Tarah.
and they removed from Tarah and pitched in Mithcah.
and they went from Mithcah and pitched in Hashmonah.
and they departed from Hashmonah and encamped at Moseroth.
and they departed from Moseroth and pitched in Benejaakan.
and they removed from Benejaakan and encamped at Horhagidgad.
and they went from Horhagidgad and pitched in Jotbathah.
and they removed from Jotbathah and encamped at Ebronah.
and they departed from Ebronah and encamped at Eziongaber.
and they removed from Eziongaber and pitched in the
wilderness of Zin which is Kadesh.
and they removed from Kadesh and pitched in mount Hor in the
edge of the land of Edom.
and Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment
of the lord and died there in the fortieth year after the
children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt in the
first day of the fifth month.
and Aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old when
he died in mount Hor.
and king Arad the Canaanite which dwelt in the south in the
land of Canaan heard of the coming of the children of Israel.
and they departed from mount Hor and pitched in Zalmonah.
and they departed from Zalmonah and pitched in Punon.
and they departed from Punon and pitched in Oboth.
and they departed from Oboth and pitched in Ijeabarim in the
border of Moab.
and they departed from Iim and pitched in Dibongad.
and they removed from Dibongad and encamped in
Almondiblathaim.
and they removed from Almondiblathaim and pitched in the
mountains of Abarim before Nebo.
and they departed from the mountains of Abarim and pitched in
the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.
and they pitched by Jordan from Bethjesimoth even unto
Abelshittim in the plains of Moab.
and the lord spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan
near Jericho saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them when ye
are passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan
then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from
before you and destroy all their pictures and destroy all
their molten images and quite pluck down all their high
places
and ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land and dwell
therein for I have given you the land to possess it.
and ye shall divide the land by Lot for an inheritance among
your families and to the more ye shall give the more
inheritance and to the fewer ye shall give the less
inheritance every man s inheritance shall be in the place
where his Lot falleth according to the tribes of your fathers
ye shall inherit.
but if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from
before you then it shall come to pass that those which ye
let remain of them shall be pricks in your eyes and thorns in
your sides and shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.
moreover it shall come to pass that I shall do unto you as I
thought to do unto them.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
command the children of Israel and say unto them when ye
come into the land of Canaan this is the land that shall
fall unto you for an inheritance even the land of Canaan with
the coasts thereof
then your south quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin
along by the coast of Edom and your south border shall be the
outmost coast of the salt sea eastward
and your border shall turn from the south to the ascent of
Akrabbim and pass on to Zin and the going forth thereof
shall be from the south to Kadeshbarnea and shall go on to
Hazaraddar and pass on to Azmon
and the border shall fetch a compass from Azmon unto the river
of Egypt and the goings out of it shall be at the sea.
and as for the western border ye shall even have the great
sea for a border this shall be your west border.
and this shall be your north border from the great sea ye
shall point out for you mount Hor
from mount Hor ye shall point out your border unto the
entrance of Hamath and the goings forth of the border shall
be to Zedad
and the border shall go on to Ziphron and the goings out of
it shall be at Hazarenan this shall be your north border.
and ye shall point out your east border from Hazarenan to
Shepham
and the coast shall go down from Shepham to Riblah on the
east side of Ain and the border shall descend and shall
reach unto the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward
and the border shall go down to Jordan and the goings out of
it shall be at the salt sea this shall be your land with the
coasts thereof round about.
and Moses commanded the children of Israel saying this is
the land which ye shall inherit by Lot which the lord
commanded to give unto the nine tribes and to the half tribe
for the tribe of the children of Reuben according to the house
of their fathers and the tribe of the children of Gad
according to the house of their fathers have received their
inheritance and half the tribe of Manasseh have received
their inheritance
the two tribes and the half tribe have received their
inheritance on this side Jordan near Jericho eastward toward
the sunrising.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
these are the names of the men which shall divide the land
unto you Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun.
and ye shall take one prince of every tribe to divide the
land by inheritance.
and the names of the men are these of the tribe of Judah
Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
and of the tribe of the children of Simeon Shemuel the son of
Ammihud.
of the tribe of Benjamin Elidad the son of Chislon.
and the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan Bukki the
son of Jogli.
the prince of the children of Joseph for the tribe of the
children of Manasseh Hanniel the son of Ephod.
and the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim Kemuel
the son of Shiphtan.
and the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun
Elizaphan the son of Parnach.
and the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar
Paltiel the son of Azzan.
and the prince of the tribe of the children of Asher Ahihud
the son of Shelomi.
and the prince of the tribe of the children of Naphtali
Pedahel the son of Ammihud.
these are they whom the lord commanded to divide the
inheritance unto the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.
and the lord spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan
near Jericho saying
command the children of Israel that they give unto the
Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to dwell
in and ye shall give also unto the Levites suburbs for the
cities round about them.
and the cities shall they have to dwell in and the suburbs of
them shall be for their cattle and for their goods and for
all their beasts.
and the suburbs of the cities which ye shall give unto the
Levites shall reach from the wall of the city and outward a
thousand cubits round about.
and ye shall measure from without the city on the east side
two thousand cubits and on the south side two thousand
cubits and on the west side two thousand cubits and on the
north side two thousand cubits and the city shall be in the
midst this shall be to them the suburbs of the cities.
and among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites
there shall be six cities for refuge which ye shall appoint
for the manslayer that he may flee thither and to them ye
shall add forty and two cities.
so all the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be
forty and eight cities them shall ye give with their suburbs.
and the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession
of the children of Israel from them that have many ye shall
give many but from them that have few ye shall give few
every one shall give of his cities unto the Levites according
to his inheritance which he inheriteth.
and the lord spake unto Moses saying
speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them when ye
be come over Jordan into the land of Canaan
then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for
you that the slayer may flee thither which killeth any
person at unawares.
and they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger
that the manslayer die not until he stand before the
congregation in judgment.
and of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye
have for refuge.
ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan and three
cities shall ye give in the land of Canaan which shall be
cities of refuge.
these six cities shall be a refuge both for the children of
Israel and for the stranger and for the sojourner among
them that every one that killeth any person unawares may flee
thither.
and if he smite him with an instrument of Iron so that he
die he is a murderer the murderer shall surely be put to
death.
and if he smite him with throwing a stone wherewith he may
die and he die he is a murderer the murderer shall surely
be put to death.
or if he smite him with an hand weapon of wood wherewith he
may die and he die he is a murderer the murderer shall
surely be put to death.
the revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer when he
meeteth him he shall slay him.
but if he thrust him of hatred or hurl at him by laying of
wait that he die
or in enmity smite him with his hand that he die he that
smote him shall surely be put to death for he is a murderer
the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer when he meeteth
him.
but if he thrust him suddenly without enmity or have cast
upon him any thing without laying of wait
or with any stone wherewith a man may die seeing him not
and cast it upon him that he die and was not his enemy
Neither sought his harm
then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the
revenger of blood according to these judgments
and the congregation shall deliver the slayer out of the hand
of the revenger of blood and the congregation shall restore
him to the city of his refuge whither he was fled and he
shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest which was
anointed with the holy oil.
but if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of
the city of his refuge whither he was fled
and the revenger of blood find him without the borders of the
city of his refuge and the revenger of blood kill the slayer
he shall not be guilty of blood
because he should have remained in the city of his refuge
until the death of the high priest but after the death of the
high priest the slayer shall return into the land of his
possession.
so these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
whoso killeth any person the murderer shall be put to death
by the mouth of witnesses but one witness shall not testify
against any person to cause him to die.
moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
murderer which is guilty of death but he shall be surely put
to death.
and ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the
city of his refuge that he should come again to dwell in the
land until the death of the priest.
so ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are for blood it
defileth the land and the land cannot be cleansed of the
blood that is shed therein but by the blood of him that shed
it.
defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit wherein
I dwell for I the lord dwell among the children of Israel.
and the chief fathers of the families of the children of
Gilead the son of Machir the son of Manasseh of the
families of the sons of Joseph came near and spake before
Moses and before the princes the chief fathers of the
children of Israel
and they said the lord commanded my lord to give the land for
an inheritance by Lot to the children of Israel and my lord
was commanded by the lord to give the inheritance of
Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.
and if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes
of the children of Israel then shall their inheritance be
taken from the inheritance of our fathers and shall be put to
the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received so
shall it be taken from the Lot of our inheritance.
and when the jubile of the children of Israel shall be then
shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the
tribe whereunto they are received so shall their inheritance
be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our
fathers.
and Moses commanded the children of Israel according to the
word of the lord saying the tribe of the sons of Joseph hath
said well.
this is the thing which the lord doth command concerning the
daughters of Zelophehad saying let them marry to whom they
think best only to the family of the tribe of their father
shall they marry.
so shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove
from tribe to tribe for every one of the children of Israel
shall keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his
fathers.
and every daughter that possesseth an inheritance in any
tribe of the children of Israel shall be wife unto one of the
family of the tribe of her father that the children of Israel
may enjoy every man the inheritance of his fathers.
Neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another
tribe but every one of the tribes of the children of Israel
shall keep himself to his own inheritance.
even as the lord commanded Moses so did the daughters of
Zelophehad
for Mahlah Tirzah and Hoglah and Milcah and Noah the
daughters of Zelophehad were married unto their father s
brothers sons
and they were married into the families of the sons of
Manasseh the son of Joseph and their inheritance remained in
the tribe of the family of their father.
these are the commandments and the judgments which the lord
commanded by the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in
the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.
these be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this
side Jordan in the wilderness in the plain over against the
red sea between Paran and Tophel and Laban and Hazeroth
and Dizahab.
 there are eleven days journey from Horeb by the way of mount
Seir unto Kadeshbarnea.
and it came to pass in the fortieth year in the eleventh
month on the first day of the month that Moses spake unto
the children of Israel according unto all that the lord had
given him in commandment unto them
after he had slain Sihon the king of the Amorites which dwelt
in Heshbon and Og the king of Bashan which dwelt at Astaroth
in Edrei
on this side Jordan in the land of Moab began Moses to
declare this law saying
the lord our God spake unto us in Horeb saying ye have dwelt
long enough in this mount
turn you and take your journey and go to the mount of the
Amorites and unto all the places nigh thereunto in the
plain in the hills and in the vale and in the south and by
the sea side to the land of the Canaanites and unto Lebanon
unto the great river the river Euphrates.
behold I have set the land before you go in and possess the
land which the lord sware unto your fathers Abraham Isaac
and Jacob to give unto them and to their seed after them.
and I spake unto you at that time saying I Am not able to
bear you myself alone
the lord your God hath multiplied you and behold ye are
this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.
 the lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so
many more as ye are and bless you as he hath promised you
how can I myself alone bear your cumbrance and your burden
and your strife?
take you wise men and understanding and known among your
tribes and I will make them rulers over you.
and ye answered me and said the thing which thou hast spoken
is good for us to do.
so I took the chief of your tribes wise men and known and
made them heads over you captains over thousands and
captains over hundreds and captains over fifties and
captains over tens and officers among your tribes.
and I charged your judges at that time saying hear the
causes between your brethren and judge righteously between
every man and his brother and the stranger that is with him.
ye shall not respect persons in judgment but ye shall hear
the small as well as the great ye shall not be afraid of the
face of man for the judgment is God s and the cause that is
too hard for you bring it unto me and I will hear it.
and I commanded you at that time all the things which ye
should do.
and when we departed from Horeb we went through all that
great and terrible wilderness which ye saw by the way of the
mountain of the Amorites as the lord our God commanded us
and we came to Kadeshbarnea.
and I said unto you ye are come unto the mountain of the
Amorites which the lord our God doth give unto us.
behold the lord thy God hath set the land before thee go up
and possess it as the lord God of thy fathers hath said unto
thee fear not Neither be discouraged.
and ye came near unto me every one of you and said we will
send men before us and they shall search us out the land and
bring us word again by what way we must go up and into what
cities we shall come.
and the saying pleased me well and I took twelve men of you
one of a tribe
and they turned and went up into the mountain and came unto
the valley of Eshcol and searched it out.
and they took of the fruit of the land in their hands and
brought it down unto us and brought us word again and said
it is a good land which the lord our God doth give us.
notwithstanding ye would not go up but rebelled against the
commandment of the lord your God
and ye murmured in your tents and said because the lord
hated us he hath brought us forth out of the land of Egypt
to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites to destroy us.
whither shall we go up? our brethren have discouraged our
heart saying the people is greater and taller than we the
cities are great and walled up to heaven and moreover we have
seen the sons of the Anakims there.
then I said unto you dread not Neither be afraid of them.
the lord your God which goeth before you he shall fight for
you according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your
eyes
and in the wilderness where thou hast seen how that the lord
thy God bare thee as a man doth bear his son in all the way
that ye went until ye came into this place.
yet in this thing ye did not believe the lord your God
who went in the way before you to search you out a place to
pitch your tents in in fire by night to shew you by what way
ye should go and in a cloud by day.
and the lord heard the voice of your words and was wroth and
sware saying
surely there shall not one of these men of this evil
generation see that good land which I sware to give unto your
fathers.
save Caleb the son of Jephunneh he shall see it and to him
will I give the land that he hath trodden upon and to his
children because he hath wholly followed the lord.
also the lord was angry with me for your sakes saying thou
also shalt not go in thither.
but Joshua the son of Nun which standeth before thee he
shall go in thither encourage him for he shall cause Israel
to inherit it.
moreover your little ones which ye said should be a prey and
your children which in that day had no knowledge between good
and evil they shall go in thither and unto them will I give
it and they shall possess it.
but as for you turn you and take your journey into the
wilderness by the way of the red sea.
then ye answered and said unto me we have sinned against the
lord we will go up and fight according to all that the lord
our God commanded us. and when ye had girded on every man his
weapons of war ye were ready to go up into the hill.
and the lord said unto me say unto them. go not up Neither
fight for I Am not among you lest ye be smitten before your
enemies.
so I spake unto you and ye would not hear but rebelled
against the commandment of the lord and went presumptuously
up into the hill.
and the Amorites which dwelt in that mountain came out
against you and chased you as bees do and destroyed you in
Seir even unto Hormah.
and ye returned and wept before the lord but the lord would
not hearken to your voice nor give ear unto you.
so ye abode in Kadesh many days according unto the days that
ye abode there.
then we turned and took our journey into the wilderness by
the way of the red sea as the lord spake unto me and we
compassed mount Seir many days.
and the lord spake unto me saying
ye have compassed this mountain long enough turn you
northward.
and command thou the people saying ye are to pass through
the coast of your brethren the children of Esau which dwell
in Seir and they shall be afraid of you take ye good heed
unto yourselves therefore
meddle not with them for I will not give you of their land
no not so Much as a foot breadth because I have given mount
Seir unto Esau for a possession.
ye shall buy meat of them for money that ye may eat and ye
shall also buy water of them for money that ye may drink.
for the lord thy God hath blessed thee in all the works of thy
hand he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness
these forty years the lord thy God hath been with thee thou
hast lacked nothing.
and when we passed by from our brethren the children of Esau
which dwelt in Seir through the way of the plain from Elath
and from Eziongaber we turned and passed by the way of the
wilderness of Moab.
and the lord said unto me distress not the Moabites Neither
contend with them in battle for I will not give thee of their
land for a possession because I have given Ar unto the
children of Lot for a possession.
the Emims dwelt therein in times past a people great and
many and tall as the Anakims
which also were accounted giants as the Anakims but the
Moabites called them Emims.
the Horims also dwelt in Seir beforetime but the children of
Esau succeeded them when they had destroyed them from before
them and dwelt in their stead as Israel did unto the land of
his possession which the lord gave unto them.
now rise up said I and get you over the brook Zered. and we
went over the brook Zered.
and the space in which we came from Kadeshbarnea until we
were come over the brook Zered was thirty and eight years
until all the generation of the men of war were wasted out
from among the host as the lord sware unto them.
for indeed the hand of the lord was against them to destroy
them from among the host until they were consumed.
so it came to pass when all the men of war were consumed and
dead from among the people
that the lord spake unto me saying
thou art to pass over through Ar the coast of Moab this day
and when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon
distress them not nor meddle with them for I will not give
thee of the land of the children of Ammon any possession
because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a
possession.
 that also was accounted a land of giants giants dwelt
therein in old time and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims
a people great and many and tall as the Anakims but the
lord destroyed them before them and they succeeded them and
dwelt in their stead
as he did to the children of Esau which dwelt in Seir when
he destroyed the Horims from before them and they succeeded
them and dwelt in their stead even unto this day
and the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim even unto Azzah the
Caphtorims which came forth out of Caphtor destroyed them
and dwelt in their stead.
rise ye up take your journey and pass over the river Arnon
behold I have given into thine hand Sihon the Amorite king
of Heshbon and his land begin to possess it and contend
with him in battle.
this day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of
thee upon the nations that are under the whole heaven who
shall hear report of thee and shall tremble and be in
anguish because of thee.
and I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth unto
Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace saying
let me pass through thy land I will go along by the high way
I will Neither turn unto the right hand nor to the left.
thou shalt sell me meat for money that I may eat and give me
water for money that I may drink only I will pass through on
my feet
 as the children of Esau which dwell in Seir and the Moabites
which dwell in Ar did unto me until I shall pass over
Jordan into the land which the lord our God giveth us.
but Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him for
the lord thy God hardened his spirit and made his heart
obstinate that he might deliver him into thy hand as
appeareth this day.
and the lord said unto me behold I have begun to give Sihon
and his land before thee begin to possess that thou mayest
inherit his land.
then Sihon came out against us he and all his people to
fight at Jahaz.
and the lord our God delivered him before us and we smote
him and his sons and all his people.
and we took all his cities at that time and utterly destroyed
the men and the women and the little ones of every city we
left none to remain
only the cattle we took for a prey unto ourselves and the
spoil of the cities which we took.
from Aroer which is by the brink of the river of Arnon and
from the city that is by the river even unto Gilead there
was not one city too strong for us the lord our God delivered
all unto us
only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou camest not
nor unto any place of the river Jabbok nor unto the cities in
the mountains nor unto whatsoever the lord our God forbad us.
then we turned and went up the way to Bashan and Og the king
of Bashan came out against us he and all his people to
battle at Edrei.
and the lord said unto me fear him not for I will deliver
him and all his people and his land into thy hand and thou
shalt do unto him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the
Amorites which dwelt at Heshbon.
so the lord our God delivered into our hands Og also the king
of Bashan and all his people and we smote him until none was
left to him remaining.
and we took all his cities at that time there was not a city
which we took not from them threescore cities all the region
of Argob the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
all these cities were fenced with high walls gates and bars
beside unwalled towns a great many.
and we utterly destroyed them as we did unto Sihon king of
Heshbon utterly destroying the men women and children of
every city.
but all the cattle and the spoil of the cities we took for a
prey to ourselves.
and we took at that time out of the hand of the two kings of
the Amorites the land that was on this side Jordan from the
river of Arnon unto mount Hermon
 which Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion and the Amorites call
it Shenir
all the cities of the plain and all Gilead and all Bashan
unto Salchah and Edrei cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
for only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants
behold his bedstead was a bedstead of Iron is it not in
Rabbath of the children of Ammon? nine cubits was the length
thereof and four cubits the breadth of it after the cubit of
a man.
and this land which we possessed at that time from Aroer
which is by the river Arnon and half mount Gilead and the
cities thereof gave I unto the Reubenites and to the Gadites.
and the rest of Gilead and all Bashan being the kingdom of
Og gave I unto the half tribe of Manasseh all the region of
Argob with all Bashan which was called the land of giants.
Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto
the coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi and called them after his
own name Bashanhavothjair unto this day.
and I gave Gilead unto Machir.
and unto the Reubenites and unto the Gadites I gave from
Gilead even unto the river Arnon half the valley and the
border even unto the river Jabbok which is the border of the
children of Ammon
the plain also and Jordan and the coast thereof from
Chinnereth even unto the sea of the plain even the salt sea
under Ashdothpisgah eastward.
and I commanded you at that time saying the lord your God
hath given you this land to possess it ye shall pass over
armed before your brethren the children of Israel all that
are meet for the war.
but your wives and your little ones and your cattle for I
know that ye have Much cattle shall abide in your cities
which I have given you
until the lord have given rest unto your brethren as well as
unto you and until they also possess the land which the lord
your God hath given them beyond Jordan and then shall ye
return every man unto his possession which I have given you.
and I commanded Joshua at that time saying thine eyes have
seen all that the lord your God hath done unto these two
kings so shall the lord do unto all the kingdoms whither thou
passest.
ye shall not fear them for the lord your God he shall fight
for you.
and I besought the lord at that time saying
O lord God thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness
and thy Mighty hand for what God is there in heaven or in
earth that can do according to thy works and according to
thy might?
I pray thee let me go over and see the good land that is
beyond Jordan that goodly mountain and Lebanon.
but the lord was wroth with me for your sakes and would not
hear me and the lord said unto me let it suffice thee speak
no more unto me of this matter.
get thee up into the top of Pisgah and lift up thine eyes
westward and northward and southward and eastward and
behold it with thine eyes for thou shalt not go over this
Jordan.
but charge Joshua and encourage him and strengthen him for
he shall go over before this people and he shall cause them
to inherit the land which thou shalt see.
so we abode in the valley over against Bethpeor.
now therefore hearken O Israel unto the statutes and unto
the judgments which I teach you for to do them that ye may
live and go in and possess the land which the lord God of
your fathers giveth you.
ye shall not add unto the word which I command you Neither
shall ye diminish ought from it that ye may keep the
commandments of the lord your God which I command you.
your eyes have seen what the lord did because of Baalpeor for
all the men that followed Baalpeor the lord thy God hath
destroyed them from among you.
but ye that did cleave unto the lord your God are alive every
one of you this day.
behold I have taught you statutes and judgments even as the
lord my God commanded me that ye should do so in the land
whither ye go to possess it.
keep therefore and do them for this is your wisdom and your
understanding in the sight of the nations which shall hear
all these statutes and say surely this great nation is a
wise and understanding people.
for what nation is there so great who hath God so nigh unto
them as the lord our God is in all things that we call upon
him for?
and what nation is there so great that hath statutes and
judgments so righteous as all this law which I set before you
this day?
only take heed to thyself and keep thy soul diligently lest
thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen and lest
they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life but teach
them thy sons and thy sons sons
specially the day that thou stoodest before the lord thy God
in Horeb when the lord said unto me gather me the people
together and I will make them hear my words that they may
learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the
earth and that they may teach their children.
and ye came near and stood under the mountain and the
mountain burned with fire unto the midst of heaven with
darkness clouds and thick darkness.
and the lord spake unto you out of the midst of the fire ye
heard the voice of the words but saw no similitude only ye
heard a voice.
and he declared unto you his covenant which he commanded you
to perform even Ten commandments and he wrote them upon two
tables of stone.
and the lord commanded me at that time to teach you statutes
and judgments that ye might do them in the land whither ye go
over to possess it.
take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves for ye saw no
manner of similitude on the day that the lord spake unto you
in Horeb out of the midst of the fire
lest ye corrupt yourselves and make you a graven image the
similitude of any figure the likeness of Male or female
the likeness of any beast that is on the earth the likeness
of any winged fowl that flieth in the air
the likeness of any thing that creepeth on the ground the
likeness of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth
and lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven and when thou
seest the sun and the moon and the stars even all the host
of heaven shouldest be driven to worship them and serve
them which the lord thy God hath divided unto all nations
under the whole heaven.
but the lord hath taken you and brought you forth out of the
Iron furnace even out of Egypt to be unto him a people of
inheritance as ye are this day.
furthermore the lord was angry with me for your sakes and
sware that I should not go over Jordan and that I should not
go in unto that good land which the lord thy God giveth thee
for an inheritance
but I must die in this land I must not go over Jordan but ye
shall go over and possess that good land.
take heed unto yourselves lest ye forget the covenant of the
lord your God which he made with you and make you a graven
image or the likeness of any thing which the lord thy God
hath forbidden thee.
for the lord thy God is a consuming fire even a jealous God.
when thou shalt beget children and children s children and
ye shall have remained long in the land and shall corrupt
yourselves and make a graven image or the likeness of any
thing and shall do evil in the sight of the lord thy God to
provoke him to anger
I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day that
ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go
over Jordan to possess it ye shall not prolong your days upon
it but shall utterly be destroyed.
and the lord shall scatter you among the nations and ye shall
be left few in number among the heathen whither the lord
shall lead you.
and there ye shall serve gods the work of men s hands wood
and stone which Neither see nor hear nor eat nor smell.
but if from thence thou shalt seek the lord thy God thou
shalt find him if thou seek him with all thy heart and with
all thy soul.
when thou art in tribulation and all these things are come
upon thee even in the latter days if thou turn to the lord
thy God and shalt be obedient unto his voice
 for the lord thy God is a merciful God he will not forsake
thee Neither destroy thee nor forget the covenant of thy
fathers which he sware unto them.
for ask now of the days that are past which were before thee
since the day that God created man upon the earth and ask
from the one side of heaven unto the other whether there hath
been any such thing as this great thing is or hath been heard
like it?
did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the
midst of the fire as thou hast heard and live?
or hath God assayed to go and take him a nation from the midst
of another nation by temptations by signs and by wonders
and by war and by a Mighty hand and by a stretched out arm
and by great terrors according to all that the lord your God
did for you in Egypt before your eyes?
unto thee it was shewed that thou mightest know that the lord
he is God there is none else beside him.
out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice that he might
instruct thee and upon earth he shewed thee his great fire
and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.
and because he loved thy fathers therefore he chose their
seed after them and brought thee out in his sight with his
Mighty power out of Egypt
to drive out nations from before thee greater and mightier
than thou art to bring thee in to give thee their land for
an inheritance as it is this day.
know therefore this day and consider it in thine heart that
the lord he is God in heaven above and upon the earth
beneath there is none else.
thou shalt keep therefore his statutes and his commandments
which I command thee this day that it may go well with thee
and with thy children after thee and that thou mayest prolong
thy days upon the earth which the lord thy God giveth thee
for ever.
then Moses severed three cities on this side Jordan toward the
sunrising
that the slayer might flee thither which should kill his
neighbour unawares and hated him not in times past and that
fleeing unto one of these cities he might live
namely Bezer in the wilderness in the plain country of the
Reubenites and Ramoth in Gilead of the Gadites and Golan in
Bashan of the Manassites.
and this is the law which Moses set before the children of
Israel
these are the testimonies and the statutes and the
judgments which Moses spake unto the children of Israel
after they came forth out of Egypt.
on this side Jordan in the valley over against Bethpeor in
the land of Sihon king of the Amorites who dwelt at Heshbon
whom Moses and the children of Israel smote after they were
come forth out of Egypt
and they possessed his land and the land of Og king of
Bashan two kings of the Amorites which were on this side
Jordan toward the sunrising
from Aroer which is by the bank of the river Arnon even unto
mount Sion which is Hermon
and all the plain on this side Jordan eastward even unto the
sea of the plain under the springs of Pisgah.
and Moses called all Israel and said unto them hear O
Israel the statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears
this day that ye may learn them and keep and do them.
the lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.
the lord made not this covenant with our fathers but with us
even us who are all of us here alive this day.
the lord talked with you face to face in the mount out of the
midst of the fire
 I stood between the lord and you at that time to shew you
the word of the lord for ye were afraid by reason of the
fire and went not up into the mount saying
I Am the lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt from the house of bondage.
thou shalt have none other gods before me.
thou shalt not make thee any graven image or any likeness of
any thing that is in heaven above or that is in the earth
beneath or that is in the waters beneath the earth
thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them nor serve them for
I the lord thy God Am a jealous God visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me
and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep
my commandments.
thou shalt not take the name of the lord thy God in vain for
the lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in
vain.
keep the sabbath day to sanctify it as the lord thy God hath
commanded thee.
six days thou shalt labour and do all thy work
but the seventh day is the sabbath of the lord thy God in it
thou shalt not do any work thou nor thy son nor thy
daughter nor thy manservant nor thy maidservant nor thine
ox nor thine ass nor any of thy cattle nor thy stranger
that is within thy gates that thy manservant and thy
maidservant may rest as well as thou.
and remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt
and that the lord thy God brought thee out thence through a
Mighty hand and by a stretched out arm therefore the lord thy
God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.
honour thy father and thy mother as the lord thy God hath
commanded thee that thy days may be prolonged and that it
may go well with thee in the land which the lord thy God
giveth thee.
thou shalt not kill.
Neither shalt thou commit adultery.
Neither shalt thou steal.
Neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour.
Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour s wife Neither shalt
thou covet thy neighbour s house his field or his
manservant or his maidservant his ox or his ass or any
thing that is thy neighbour s.
these words the lord spake unto all your assembly in the mount
out of the midst of the fire of the cloud and of the thick
darkness with a great voice and he added no more. and he
wrote them in two tables of stone and delivered them unto me.
and it came to pass when ye heard the voice out of the midst
of the darkness for the mountain did burn with fire that
ye came near unto me even all the heads of your tribes and
your elders
and ye said behold the lord our God hath shewed us his glory
and his greatness and we have heard his voice out of the
midst of the fire we have seen this day that God doth talk
with man and he liveth.
now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will
consume us if we hear the voice of the lord our God any more
then we shall die.
for who is there of all flesh that hath heard the voice of
the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire as we
have and lived?
go thou near and hear all that the lord our God shall say
and speak thou unto us all that the lord our God shall speak
unto thee and we will hear it and do it.
and the lord heard the voice of your words when ye spake unto
me and the lord said unto me I have heard the voice of the
words of this people which they have spoken unto thee they
have well said all that they have spoken.
O that there were such an heart in them that they would fear
me and keep all my commandments always that it might be well
with them and with their children for ever
go say to them get you into your tents again.
but as for thee stand thou here by me and I will speak unto
thee all the commandments and the statutes and the
judgments which thou shalt teach them that they may do them
in the land which I give them to possess it.
ye shall observe to do therefore as the lord your God hath
commanded you ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to
the left.
ye shall walk in all the ways which the lord your God hath
commanded you that ye may live and that it may be well with
you and that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye
shall possess.
now these are the commandments the statutes and the
judgments which the lord your God commanded to teach you
that ye might do them in the land whither ye go to possess it
that thou mightest fear the lord thy God to keep all his
statutes and his commandments which I command thee thou and
thy son and thy son s son all the days of thy life and that
thy days may be prolonged.
hear therefore O Israel and observe to do it that it may be
well with thee and that ye may increase mightily as the lord
God of thy fathers hath promised thee in the land that
floweth with milk and honey.
hear O Israel the lord our God is one lord
and thou shalt love the lord thy God with all thine heart and
with all thy soul and with all thy might.
and these words which I command thee this day shall be in
thine heart
and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children and
shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house and when
thou walkest by the way and when thou liest down and when
thou risest up.
and thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand and they
shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.
and thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house and on
thy gates.
and it shall be when the lord thy God shall have brought thee
into the land which he sware unto thy fathers to Abraham to
Isaac and to Jacob to give thee great and goodly cities
which thou buildedst not
and houses full of all good things which thou filledst not
and wells digged which thou diggedst not vineyards and olive
trees which thou plantedst not when thou shalt have eaten
and be full
then beware lest thou forget the lord which brought thee
forth out of the land of Egypt from the house of bondage.
thou shalt fear the lord thy God and serve him and shalt
swear by his name.
ye shall not go after other gods of the gods of the people
which are round about you
 for the lord thy God is a jealous God among you lest the
anger of the lord thy God be kindled against thee and destroy
thee from off the face of the earth.
ye shall not tempt the lord your God as ye tempted him in
Massah.
ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the lord your
God and his testimonies and his statutes which he hath
commanded thee.
and thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of
the lord that it may be well with thee and that thou mayest
go in and possess the good land which the lord sware unto thy
fathers.
to cast out all thine enemies from before thee as the lord
hath spoken.
and when thy son asketh thee in time to come saying what
mean the testimonies and the statutes and the judgments
which the lord our God hath commanded you?
then thou shalt say unto thy son we were Pharaoh s bondmen in
Egypt and the lord brought us out of Egypt with a Mighty
hand
and the lord shewed signs and wonders great and sore upon
Egypt upon Pharaoh and upon all his household before our
eyes
and he brought us out from thence that he might bring us in
to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.
and the lord commanded us to do all these statutes to fear
the lord our God for our good always that he might preserve
us alive as it is at this day.
and it shall be our righteousness if we observe to do all
these commandments before the lord our God as he hath
commanded us.
when the lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither
thou goest to possess it and hath cast out many nations
before thee the Hittites and the Girgashites and the
Amorites and the Canaanites and the Perizzites and the
Hivites and the Jebusites seven nations greater and mightier
than thou
and when the lord thy God shall deliver them before thee thou
shalt smite them and utterly destroy them thou shalt make no
covenant with them nor shew mercy unto them
Neither shalt thou make marriages with them thy daughter thou
shalt not give unto his son nor his daughter shalt thou take
unto thy son.
for they will turn away thy son from following me that they
may serve other gods so will the anger of the lord be kindled
against you and destroy thee suddenly.
but thus shall ye deal with them ye shall destroy their
altars and break down their images and cut down their
groves and burn their graven images with fire.
for thou art an holy people unto the lord thy God the lord
thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself
above all people that are upon the face of the earth.
the lord did not set his love upon you nor choose you
because ye were more in number than any people for ye were
the fewest of all people
but because the lord loved you and because he would keep the
oath which he had sworn unto your fathers hath the lord
brought you out with a Mighty hand and redeemed you out of
the house of bondmen from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
know therefore that the lord thy God he is God the faithful
God which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him
and keep his commandments to a thousand generations
and repayeth them that hate him to their face to destroy
them he will not be slack to him that hateth him he will
repay him to his face.
thou shalt therefore keep the commandments and the statutes
and the judgments which I command thee this day to do them.
wherefore it shall come to pass if ye hearken to these
judgments and keep and do them that the lord thy God shall
keep unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto
thy fathers
and he will love thee and bless thee and multiply thee he
will also bless the fruit of thy womb and the fruit of thy
land thy corn and thy wine and thine oil the increase of
thy kine and the flocks of thy sheep in the land which he
sware unto thy fathers to give thee.
thou shalt be blessed above all people there shall not be
Male or female barren among you or among your cattle.
and the lord will take away from thee all sickness and will
put none of the evil diseases of Egypt which thou knowest
upon thee but will lay them upon all them that hate thee.
and thou shalt consume all the people which the lord thy God
shall deliver thee thine eye shall have no pity upon them
Neither shalt thou serve their gods for that will be a snare
unto thee.
if thou shalt say in thine heart these nations are more than
I how can I dispossess them?
thou shalt not be afraid of them but shalt well remember what
the lord thy God did unto Pharaoh and unto all Egypt
the great temptations which thine eyes saw and the signs and
the wonders and the Mighty hand and the stretched out arm
whereby the lord thy God brought thee out so shall the lord
thy God do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.
moreover the lord thy God will send the hornet among them
until they that are left and hide themselves from thee be
destroyed.
thou shalt not be affrighted at them for the lord thy God is
among you a Mighty God and terrible.
and the lord thy God will put out those nations before thee by
little and little thou mayest not consume them at once lest
the beasts of the field increase upon thee.
but the lord thy God shall deliver them unto thee and shall
destroy them with a Mighty destruction until they be
destroyed.
and he shall deliver their kings into thine hand and thou
shalt destroy their name from under heaven there shall no man
be able to stand before thee until thou have destroyed them.
the graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire thou
shalt not desire the Silver or gold that is on them nor take
it unto thee lest thou be snared therin for it is an
abomination to the lord thy God.
Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house lest
thou be a cursed thing like it but thou shalt utterly detest
it and thou shalt utterly abhor it for it is a cursed thing.
all the commandments which I command thee this day shall ye
observe to do that ye may live and multiply and go in and
possess the land which the lord sware unto your fathers.
and thou shalt remember all the way which the lord thy God led
thee these forty years in the wilderness to humble thee and
to prove thee to know what was in thine heart whether thou
wouldest keep his commandments or no.
and he humbled thee and suffered thee to hunger and fed thee
with Manna which thou knewest not Neither did thy fathers
know that he might make thee know that man doth not live by
bread only but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth
of the lord doth man live.
thy raiment waxed not old upon thee Neither did thy foot
swell these forty years.
thou shalt also consider in thine heart that as a man
chasteneth his son so the lord thy God chasteneth thee.
therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the lord thy
God to walk in his ways and to fear him.
for the lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land a land of
brooks of water of fountains and depths that spring out of
valleys and hills
a land of wheat and barley and vines and fig trees and
pomegranates a land of oil olive and honey
a land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness thou
shalt not lack any thing in it a land whose stones are Iron
and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass.
when thou hast eaten and art full then thou shalt bless the
lord thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.
beware that thou forget not the lord thy God in not keeping
his commandments and his judgments and his statutes which I
command thee this day
lest when thou hast eaten and art full and hast built goodly
houses and dwelt therein
and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply and thy Silver and
thy gold is multiplied and all that thou hast is multiplied
then thine heart be lifted up and thou forget the lord thy
God which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt from
the house of bondage
who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness
wherein were fiery serpents and scorpions and drought where
there was no water who brought thee forth water out of the
rock of flint
who fed thee in the wilderness with Manna which thy fathers
knew not that he might humble thee and that he might prove
thee to do thee good at thy latter end
and thou say in thine heart my power and the might of mine
hand hath gotten me this wealth.
but thou shalt remember the lord thy God for it is he that
giveth thee power to get wealth that he may establish his
covenant which he sware unto thy fathers as it is this day.
and it shall be if thou do at all forget the lord thy God
and walk after other gods and serve them and worship them I
testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish.
as the nations which the lord destroyeth before your face so
shall ye perish because ye would not be obedient unto the
voice of the lord your God.
hear O Israel thou art to pass over Jordan this day to go
in to possess nations greater and mightier than thyself
cities great and fenced up to heaven
a people great and tall the children of the Anakims whom
thou knowest and of whom thou hast heard say who can stand
before the children of Anak
understand therefore this day that the lord thy God is he
which goeth over before thee as a consuming fire he shall
destroy them and he shall bring them down before thy face so
shalt thou drive them out and destroy them quickly as the
lord hath said unto thee.
speak not thou in thine heart after that the lord thy God
hath cast them out from before thee saying for my
righteousness the lord hath brought me in to possess this
land but for the wickedness of these nations the lord doth
drive them out from before thee.
not for thy righteousness or for the uprightness of thine
heart dost thou go to possess their land but for the
wickedness of these nations the lord thy God doth drive them
out from before thee and that he may perform the word which
the lord sware unto thy fathers Abraham Isaac and Jacob.
understand therefore that the lord thy God giveth thee not
this good land to possess it for thy righteousness for thou
art a stiffnecked people.
remember and forget not how thou provokedst the lord thy God
to wrath in the wilderness from the day that thou didst
depart out of the land of Egypt until ye came unto this
place ye have been rebellious against the lord.
also in Horeb ye provoked the lord to wrath so that the lord
was angry with you to have destroyed you.
when I was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of
stone even the tables of the covenant which the lord made
with you then I abode in the mount forty days and forty
nights I Neither did eat bread nor drink water
and the lord delivered unto me two tables of stone written
with the finger of God and on them was written according to
all the words which the lord spake with you in the mount out
of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.
and it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights
that the lord gave me the two tables of stone even the tables
of the covenant.
and the lord said unto me Arise get thee down quickly from
hence for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of
Egypt have corrupted themselves they are quickly turned aside
out of the way which I commanded them they have made them a
molten image.
furthermore the lord spake unto me saying I have seen this
people and behold it is a stiffnecked people
let me alone that I may destroy them and blot out their name
from under heaven and I will make of thee a nation mightier
and greater than they.
so I turned and came down from the mount and the mount burned
with fire and the two tables of the covenant were in my two
hands.
and I looked and behold ye had sinned against the lord your
God and had made you a molten calf ye had turned aside
quickly out of the way which the lord had commanded you.
and I took the two tables and cast them out of my two hands
and brake them before your eyes.
and I fell down before the lord as at the first forty days
and forty nights I did Neither eat bread nor drink water
because of all your sins which ye sinned in doing wickedly in
the sight of the lord to provoke him to anger.
for I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure wherewith
the lord was wroth against you to destroy you. but the lord
hearkened unto me at that time also.
and the lord was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him
and I prayed for Aaron also the same time.
and I took your Sin the calf which ye had made and burnt it
with fire and stamped it and ground it very small even
until it was as small as dust and I cast the dust thereof
into the brook that descended out of the mount.
and at Taberah and at Massah and at Kibrothhattaavah ye
provoked the lord to wrath.
likewise when the lord sent you from Kadeshbarnea saying go
up and possess the land which I have given you then ye
rebelled against the commandment of the lord your God and ye
believed him not nor hearkened to his voice.
ye have been rebellious against the lord from the day that I
knew you.
thus I fell down before the lord forty days and forty nights
as I fell down at the first because the lord had said he
would destroy you.
I prayed therefore unto the lord and said O lord God
destroy not thy people and thine inheritance which thou hast
redeemed through thy greatness which thou hast brought forth
out of Egypt with a Mighty hand.
remember thy servants Abraham Isaac and Jacob look not
unto the stubbornness of this people nor to their wickedness
nor to their Sin
lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say because the
lord was not able to bring them into the land which he
promised them and because he hated them he hath brought them
out to slay them in the wilderness.
yet they are thy people and thine inheritance which thou
broughtest out by thy Mighty power and by thy stretched out
arm.
at that time the lord said unto me Hew thee two tables of
stone like unto the first and come up unto me into the mount
and make thee an ark of wood.
and I will write on the tables the words that were in the
first tables which thou brakest and thou shalt put them in
the ark.
and I made an ark of Shittim wood and hewed two tables of
stone like unto the first and went up into the mount having
the two tables in mine hand.
and he wrote on the tables according to the first writing
the Ten commandments which the lord spake unto you in the
mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly
and the lord gave them unto me.
and I turned myself and came down from the mount and put the
tables in the ark which I had made and there they be as the
lord commanded me.
and the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of
the children of Jaakan to Mosera there Aaron died and there
he was buried and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest s
office in his stead.
from thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah and from Gudgodah to
Jotbath a land of rivers of waters.
at that time the lord separated the tribe of Levi to bear the
ark of the covenant of the lord to stand before the lord to
minister unto him and to bless in his name unto this day.
wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren
the lord is his inheritance according as the lord thy God
promised him.
and I stayed in the mount according to the first time forty
days and forty nights and the lord hearkened unto me at that
time also and the lord would not destroy thee.
and the lord said unto me Arise take thy journey before the
people that they may go in and possess the land which I
sware unto their fathers to give unto them.
and now Israel what doth the lord thy God require of thee
but to fear the lord thy God to walk in all his ways and to
love him and to serve the lord thy God with all thy heart and
with all thy soul
to keep the commandments of the lord and his statutes which
I command thee this day for thy good?
behold the heaven and the heaven of heavens is the lord s thy
God the earth also with all that therein is.
only the lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them and
he chose their seed after them even you above all people as
it is this day.
circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart and be no
more stiffnecked.
for the lord your God is God of gods and lord of lords a
great God a Mighty and a terrible which regardeth not
persons nor taketh reward
he doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow and
loveth the stranger in giving him food and raiment.
love ye therefore the stranger for ye were strangers in the
land of Egypt.
thou shalt fear the lord thy God him shalt thou serve and to
him shalt thou cleave and swear by his name.
he is thy praise and he is thy God that hath done for thee
these great and terrible things which thine eyes have seen.
thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and Ten
persons and now the lord thy God hath made thee as the stars
of heaven for multitude.
therefore thou shalt love the lord thy God and keep his
charge and his statutes and his judgments and his
commandments alway.
and know ye this day for I speak not with your children which
have not known and which have not seen the chastisement of
the lord your God his greatness his Mighty hand and his
stretched out arm
and his miracles and his acts which he did in the midst of
Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt and unto all his land
and what he did unto the army of Egypt unto their horses and
to their chariots how he made the water of the red sea to
overflow them as they pursued after you and how the lord hath
destroyed them unto this day
and what he did unto you in the wilderness until ye came into
this place
and what he did unto Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab the
son of Reuben how the earth opened her mouth and swallowed
them up and their households and their tents and all the
substance that was in their possession in the midst of all
Israel
but your eyes have seen all the great acts of the lord which
he did.
therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which I command
you this day that ye may be strong and go in and possess the
land whither ye go to possess it
and that ye may prolong your days in the land which the lord
sware unto your fathers to give unto them and to their seed a
land that floweth with milk and honey.
for the land whither thou goest in to possess it is not as
the land of Egypt from whence ye came out where thou sowedst
thy seed and wateredst it with thy foot as a garden of
herbs
but the land whither ye go to possess it is a land of hills
and valleys and drinketh water of the rain of heaven
a land which the lord thy God careth for the eyes of the lord
thy God are always upon it from the beginning of the year
even unto the end of the year.
and it shall come to pass if ye shall hearken diligently unto
my commandments which I command you this day to love the lord
your God and to serve him with all your heart and with all
your soul
that I will give you the rain of your land in his due season
the first rain and the latter rain that thou mayest gather in
thy corn and thy wine and thine oil.
and I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle that thou
mayest eat and be full.
take heed to yourselves that your heart be not deceived and
ye turn aside and serve other gods and worship them
and then the lord s wrath be kindled against you and he shut
up the heaven that there be no rain and that the land yield
not her fruit and lest ye perish quickly from off the good
land which the lord giveth you.
therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in
your soul and bind them for a sign upon your hand that they
may be as frontlets between your eyes.
and ye shall teach them your children speaking of them when
thou sittest in thine house and when thou walkest by the way
when thou liest down and when thou risest up.
and thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house
and upon thy gates
that your days may be multiplied and the days of your
children in the land which the lord sware unto your fathers
to give them as the days of heaven upon the earth.
for if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I
command you to do them to love the lord your God to walk in
all his ways and to cleave unto him
then will the lord drive out all these nations from before
you and ye shall possess greater nations and mightier than
yourselves.
every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall
be yours from the wilderness and Lebanon from the river the
river Euphrates even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast
be.
there shall no man be able to stand before you for the lord
your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon
all the land that ye shall tread upon as he hath said unto
you.
behold I set before you this day a blessing and a curse
a blessing if ye obey the commandments of the lord your God
which I command you this day
and a curse if ye will not obey the commandments of the lord
your God but turn aside out of the way which I command you
this day to go after other gods which ye have not known.
and it shall come to pass when the lord thy God hath brought
thee in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it that
thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim and the curse
upon mount ebal.
are they not on the other side Jordan by the way where the
sun goeth down in the land of the Canaanites which dwell in
the champaign over against Gilgal beside the plains of Moreh?
for ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the land
which the lord your God giveth you and ye shall possess it
and dwell therein.
and ye shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments
which I set before you this day.
these are the statutes and judgments which ye shall observe
to do in the land which the lord God of thy fathers giveth
thee to possess it all the days that ye live upon the earth.
ye shall utterly destroy all the places wherein the nations
which ye shall possess served their gods upon the high
mountains and upon the hills and under every green tree
and ye shall overthrow their altars and break their pillars
and burn their groves with fire and ye shall Hew down the
graven images of their gods and destroy the names of them out
of that place.
ye shall not do so unto the lord your God.
but unto the place which the lord your God shall choose out of
all your tribes to put his name there even unto his
habitation shall ye seek and thither thou shalt come
and thither ye shall bring your burnt offerings and your
sacrifices and your tithes and heave offerings of your hand
and your vows and your freewill offerings and the firstlings
of your herds and of your flocks
and there ye shall eat before the lord your God and ye shall
rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto ye and your
households wherein the lord thy God hath blessed thee.
ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day
every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.
for ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance
which the lord your God giveth you.
but when ye go over Jordan and dwell in the land which the
lord your God giveth you to inherit and when he giveth you
rest from all your enemies round about so that ye dwell in
safety
then there shall be a place which the lord your God shall
choose to cause his name to dwell there thither shall ye
bring all that I command you your burnt offerings and your
sacrifices your tithes and the heave offering of your hand
and all your choice vows which ye vow unto the lord
and ye shall rejoice before the lord your God ye and your
sons and your daughters and your menservants and your
maidservants and the Levite that is within your gates
forasmuch as he hath no part nor inheritance with you.
take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings
in every place that thou seest
but in the place which the lord shall choose in one of thy
tribes there thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings and there
thou shalt do all that I command thee.
notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy
gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after according to the
blessing of the lord thy God which he hath given thee the
unclean and the clean may eat thereof as of the roebuck and
as of the hart.
only ye shall not eat the blood ye shall pour it upon the
earth as water.
thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn or
of thy wine or of thy oil or the firstlings of thy herds or
of thy flock nor any of thy vows which thou vowest nor thy
freewill offerings or heave offering of thine hand
but thou must eat them before the lord thy God in the place
which the lord thy God shall choose thou and thy son and
thy daughter and thy manservant and thy maidservant and the
Levite that is within thy gates and thou shalt rejoice before
the lord thy God in all that thou puttest thine hands unto.
take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite as long
as thou livest upon the earth.
when the lord thy God shall enlarge thy border as he hath
promised thee and thou shalt say I will eat flesh because
thy soul longeth to eat flesh thou mayest eat flesh
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.
if the place which the lord thy God hath chosen to put his
name there be too far from thee then thou shalt kill of thy
herd and of thy flock which the lord hath given thee as I
have commanded thee and thou shalt eat in thy gates
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.
even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten so thou shalt eat
them the unclean and the clean shall eat of them alike.
only be sure that thou eat not the blood for the blood is the
life and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh.
thou shalt not eat it thou shalt pour it upon the earth as
water.
thou shalt not eat it that it may go well with thee and with
thy children after thee when thou shalt do that which is
right in the sight of the lord.
only thy holy things which thou hast and thy vows thou shalt
take and go unto the place which the lord shall choose
and thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings the flesh and the
blood upon the altar of the lord thy God and the blood of
thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar of the lord
thy God and thou shalt eat the flesh.
observe and hear all these words which I command thee that it
may go well with thee and with thy children after thee for
ever when thou doest that which is good and right in the
sight of the lord thy God.
when the lord thy God shall cut off the nations from before
thee whither thou goest to possess them and thou succeedest
them and dwellest in their land
take heed to thyself that thou be not snared by following
them after that they be destroyed from before thee and that
thou enquire not after their gods saying how did these
nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.
thou shalt not do so unto the lord thy God for every
abomination to the lord which he hateth have they done unto
their gods for even their sons and their daughters they have
burnt in the fire to their gods.
what thing soever I command you observe to do it thou shalt
not add thereto nor diminish from it.
if there Arise among you a prophet or a dreamer of dreams
and giveth thee a sign or a wonder
and the sign or the wonder come to pass whereof he spake unto
thee saying let us go after other gods which thou hast not
known and let us serve them
thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet or that
dreamer of dreams for the lord your God proveth you to know
whether ye love the lord your God with all your heart and with
all your soul.
ye shall walk after the lord your God and fear him and keep
his commandments and obey his voice and ye shall serve him
and cleave unto him.
and that prophet or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to
death because he hath spoken to turn you away from the lord
your God which brought you out of the land of Egypt and
redeemed you out of the house of bondage to thrust thee out
of the way which the lord thy God commanded thee to walk in.
so shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thee.
if thy brother the son of thy mother or thy son or thy
daughter or the wife of thy bosom or thy friend which is as
thine own soul entice thee secretly saying let us go and
serve other gods which thou hast not known thou nor thy
fathers
namely of the gods of the people which are round about you
nigh unto thee or far off from thee from the one end of the
earth even unto the other end of the earth
thou shalt not consent unto him nor hearken unto him Neither
shall thine eye pity him Neither shalt thou spare Neither
shalt thou conceal him
but thou shalt surely kill him thine hand shall be first upon
him to put him to death and afterwards the hand of all the
people.
and thou shalt stone him with stones that he die because he
hath sought to thrust thee away from the lord thy God which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt from the house of
bondage.
and all Israel shall hear and fear and shall do no more any
such wickedness as this is among you.
if thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities which the lord
thy God hath given thee to dwell there saying
certain men the children of Belial are gone out from among
you and have withdrawn the inhabitants of their city saying
let us go and serve other gods which ye have not known
then shalt thou enquire and make search and ask diligently
and behold if it be truth and the thing certain that such
abomination is wrought among you
thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the
edge of the sword destroying it utterly and all that is
therein and the cattle thereof with the edge of the sword.
and thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of
the street thereof and shalt burn with fire the city and all
the spoil thereof every whit for the lord thy God and it
shall be an heap for ever it shall not be built again.
and there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine
hand that the lord may turn from the fierceness of his anger
and shew thee mercy and have compassion upon thee and
multiply thee as he hath sworn unto thy fathers
when thou shalt hearken to the voice of the lord thy God to
keep all his commandments which I command thee this day to do
that which is right in the eyes of the lord thy God.
ye are the children of the lord your God ye shall not cut
yourselves nor make any baldness between your eyes for the
dead.
for thou art an holy people unto the lord thy God and the
lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself
above all the nations that are upon the earth.
thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.
these are the beasts which ye shall eat the ox the sheep
and the goat
the hart and the roebuck and the fallow deer and the wild
goat and the pygarg and the wild ox and the chamois.
and every beast that parteth the hoof and cleaveth the cleft
into two claws and cheweth the cud among the beasts that ye
shall eat.
nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud
or of them that divide the cloven hoof as the camel and the
hare and the coney for they chew the cud but divide not the
hoof therefore they are unclean unto you.
and the swine because it divideth the hoof yet cheweth not
the cud it is unclean unto you ye shall not eat of their
flesh nor touch their dead carcase.
these ye shall eat of all that are in the waters all that
have fins and scales shall ye eat
and whatsoever hath not fins and scales ye may not eat it is
unclean unto you.
of all clean birds ye shall eat.
but these are they of which ye shall not eat the eagle and
the ossifrage and the ospray
and the glede and the kite and the vulture after his kind
and every raven after his kind
and the owl and the night hawk and the cuckow and the hawk
after his kind
the little owl and the great owl and the swan
and the pelican and the gier eagle and the cormorant
and the stork and the heron after her kind and the lapwing
and the bat.
and every creeping thing that flieth is unclean unto you they
shall not be eaten.
but of all clean fowls ye may eat.
ye shall not eat of anything that dieth of itself thou shalt
give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates that he may
eat it or thou mayest sell it unto an alien for thou art an
holy people unto the lord thy God. thou shalt not seethe a kid
in his mother s milk.
thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed that the
field bringeth forth year by year.
and thou shalt eat before the lord thy God in the place which
he shall choose to place his name there the tithe of thy
corn of thy wine and of thine oil and the firstlings of thy
herds and of thy flocks that thou mayest learn to fear the
lord thy God always.
and if the way be too long for thee so that thou art not able
to carry it or if the place be too far from thee which the
lord thy God shall choose to set his name there when the lord
thy God hath blessed thee
then shalt thou turn it into money and bind up the money in
thine hand and shalt go unto the place which the lord thy God
shall choose
and thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul
lusteth after for oxen or for sheep or for wine or for
strong drink or for whatsoever thy soul desireth and thou
shalt eat there before the lord thy God and thou shalt
rejoice thou and thine household
and the Levite that is within thy gates thou shalt not
forsake him for he hath no part nor inheritance with thee.
at the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe
of thine increase the same year and shalt lay it up within
thy gates
and the Levite because he hath no part nor inheritance with
thee and the stranger and the fatherless and the widow
which are within thy gates shall come and shall eat and be
satisfied that the lord thy God may bless thee in all the
work of thine hand which thou doest.
at the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release.
and this is the manner of the release every creditor that
lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall release it he shall
not exact it of his neighbour or of his brother because it
is called the lord s release.
of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again but that which is
thine with thy brother thine hand shall release
save when there shall be no poor among you for the lord shall
greatly bless thee in the land which the lord thy God giveth
thee for an inheritance to possess it
only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the lord thy
God to observe to do all these commandments which I command
thee this day.
for the lord thy God blesseth thee as he promised thee and
thou shalt lend unto many nations but thou shalt not borrow
and thou shalt reign over many nations but they shall not
reign over thee.
if there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within
any of thy gates in thy land which the lord thy God giveth
thee thou shalt not harden thine heart nor shut thine hand
from thy poor brother
but thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him and shalt surely
lend him sufficient for his need in that which he wanteth.
beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart
saying the seventh year the year of release is at hand and
thine eye be evil against thy poor brother and thou givest
him nought and he cry unto the lord against thee and it be
Sin unto thee.
thou shalt surely give him and thine heart shall not be
grieved when thou givest unto him because that for this thing
the lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works and in all
that thou puttest thine hand unto.
for the poor shall never cease out of the land therefore I
command thee saying thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy
brother to thy poor and to thy needy in thy land.
and if thy brother an Hebrew man or an Hebrew woman be sold
unto thee and serve thee six years then in the seventh year
thou shalt let him go free from thee.
and when thou sendest him out free from thee thou shalt not
let him go away empty
thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock and out of
thy floor and out of thy winepress of that wherewith the
lord thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.
and thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land
of Egypt and the lord thy God redeemed thee therefore I
command thee this thing to day.
and it shall be if he say unto thee I will not go away from
thee because he loveth thee and thine house because he is
well with thee
then thou shalt take an aul and thrust it through his ear
unto the door and he shall be thy servant for ever. and also
unto thy maidservant thou shalt do likewise.
it shall not seem hard unto thee when thou sendest him away
free from thee for he hath been worth a double hired servant
to thee in serving thee six years and the lord thy God shall
bless thee in all that thou doest.
all the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock
thou shalt sanctify unto the lord thy God thou shalt do no
work with the firstling of thy bullock nor shear the
firstling of thy sheep.
thou shalt eat it before the lord thy God year by year in the
place which the lord shall choose thou and thy household.
and if there be any blemish therein as if it be lame or
blind or have any ill blemish thou shalt not sacrifice it
unto the lord thy God.
thou shalt eat it within thy gates the unclean and the clean
person shall eat it alike as the roebuck and as the hart.
only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof thou shalt pour it
upon the ground as water.
observe the month of Abib and keep the passover unto the lord
thy God for in the month of Abib the lord thy God brought
thee forth out of Egypt by night.
thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the lord thy
God of the flock and the herd in the place which the lord
shall choose to place his name there.
thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it seven days shalt
thou eat unleavened bread therewith even the bread of
affliction for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt in
haste that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest
forth out of the land of Egypt all the days of thy life.
and there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy
coast seven days Neither shall there any thing of the flesh
which thou sacrificedst the first day at even remain all
night until the morning.
thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy
gates which the lord thy God giveth thee
but at the place which the lord thy God shall choose to place
his name in there thou shalt sacrifice the passover at even
at the going down of the sun at the season that thou camest
forth out of Egypt.
and thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the lord
thy God shall choose and thou shalt turn in the morning and
go unto thy tents.
six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread and on the seventh
day shall be a solemn assembly to the lord thy God thou shalt
do no work therein.
seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee begin to number the
seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle
to the corn.
and thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the lord thy God
with a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand which
thou shalt give unto the lord thy God according as the lord
thy God hath blessed thee
and thou shalt rejoice before the lord thy God thou and thy
son and thy daughter and thy manservant and thy
maidservant and the Levite that is within thy gates and the
stranger and the fatherless and the widow that are among
you in the place which the lord thy God hath chosen to place
his name there.
and thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt and
thou shalt observe and do these statutes.
thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days after
that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine
and thou shalt rejoice in thy feast thou and thy son and
thy daughter and thy manservant and thy maidservant and the
Levite the stranger and the fatherless and the widow that
are within thy gates.
seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the lord thy
God in the place which the lord shall choose because the lord
thy God shall bless thee in all thine increase and in all the
works of thine hands therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.
three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the
lord thy God in the place which he shall choose in the feast
of unleavened bread and in the feast of weeks and in the
feast of tabernacles and they shall not appear before the
lord empty
every man shall give as he is able according to the blessing
of the lord thy God which he hath given thee.
judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates
which the lord thy God giveth thee throughout thy tribes and
they shall judge the people with just judgment.
thou shalt not wrest judgment thou shalt not respect persons
Neither take a gift for a gift doth blind the eyes of the
wise and pervert the words of the righteous.
that which is altogether just shalt thou follow that thou
mayest live and inherit the land which the lord thy God
giveth thee.
thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the
altar of the lord thy God which thou shalt make thee.
Neither shalt thou set thee up any image which the lord thy
God hateth.
thou shalt not sacrifice unto the lord thy God any bullock or
sheep wherein is blemish or any evilfavouredness for that
is an abomination unto the lord thy God.
if there be found among you within any of thy gates which the
lord thy God giveth thee man or woman that hath wrought
wickedness in the sight of the lord thy God in transgressing
his covenant
and hath gone and served other gods and worshipped them
either the sun or moon or any of the host of heaven which I
have not commanded
and it be told thee and thou hast heard of it and enquired
diligently and behold it be true and the thing certain
that such abomination is wrought in Israel
then shalt thou bring forth that man or that woman which have
committed that wicked thing unto thy gates even that man or
that woman and shalt stone them with stones till they die.
at the mouth of two witnesses or three witnesses shall he
that is worthy of death be put to death but at the mouth of
one witness he shall not be put to death.
the hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him
to death and afterward the hands of all the people. so thou
shalt put the evil away from among you.
if there Arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment between
blood and blood between plea and plea and between stroke and
stroke being matters of controversy within thy gates then
shalt thou Arise and get thee up into the place which the
lord thy God shall choose
and thou shalt come unto the priests the Levites and unto the
judge that shall be in those days and enquire and they shall
shew thee the sentence of judgment
and thou shalt do according to the sentence which they of
that place which the lord shall choose shall shew thee and
thou shalt observe to do according to all that they inform
thee
according to the sentence of the law which they shall teach
thee and according to the judgment which they shall tell
thee thou shalt do thou shalt not decline from the sentence
which they shall shew thee to the right hand nor to the
left.
and the man that will do presumptuously and will not hearken
unto the priest that standeth to minister there before the
lord thy God or unto the judge even that man shall die and
thou shalt put away the evil from Israel.
and all the people shall hear and fear and do no more
presumptuously.
when thou art come unto the land which the lord thy God giveth
thee and shalt possess it and shalt dwell therein and shalt
say I will set a king over me like as all the nations that
are about me
thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee whom the lord
thy God shall choose one from among thy brethren shalt thou
set king over thee thou mayest not set a stranger over thee
which is not thy brother.
but he shall not multiply horses to himself nor cause the
people to return to Egypt to the end that he should multiply
horses forasmuch as the lord hath said unto you ye shall
henceforth return no more that way.
Neither shall he multiply wives to himself that his heart
turn not away Neither shall he greatly multiply to himself
Silver and gold.
and it shall be when he sitteth upon the throne of his
kingdom that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book
out of that which is before the priests the Levites
and it shall be with him and he shall read therein all the
days of his life that he may learn to fear the lord his God
to keep all the words of this law and these statutes to do
them
that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren and that
he turn not aside from the commandment to the right hand or
to the left to the end that he may prolong his days in his
kingdom he and his children in the midst of Israel.
the priests the Levites and all the tribe of Levi shall have
no part nor inheritance with Israel they shall eat the
offerings of the lord made by fire and his inheritance.
therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren
the lord is their inheritance as he hath said unto them.
and this shall be the priest s due from the people from them
that offer a sacrifice whether it be ox or sheep and they
shall give unto the priest the shoulder and the two cheeks
and the maw.
the firstfruit also of thy corn of thy wine and of thine
oil and the first of the fleece of thy sheep shalt thou give
him.
for the lord thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes to
stand to minister in the name of the lord him and his sons
for ever.
and if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of all Israel
where he sojourned and come with all the desire of his mind
unto the place which the lord shall choose
then he shall minister in the name of the lord his God as all
his brethren the Levites do which stand there before the
lord.
they shall have like portions to eat beside that which cometh
of the sale of his patrimony.
when thou art come into the land which the lord thy God giveth
thee thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of
those nations.
there shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son
or his daughter to pass through the fire or that useth
divination or an observer of times or an enchanter or a
witch.
or a charmer or a consulter with familiar spirits or a
wizard or a necromancer.
for all that do these things are an abomination unto the lord
and because of these abominations the lord thy God doth drive
them out from before thee.
thou shalt be perfect with the lord thy God.
for these nations which thou shalt possess hearkened unto
observers of times and unto diviners but as for thee the
lord thy God hath not suffered thee so to do.
the lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the
midst of thee of thy brethren like unto me unto him ye
shall hearken
according to all that thou desiredst of the lord thy God in
Horeb in the day of the assembly saying let me not hear
again the voice of the lord my God Neither let me see this
great fire any more that I die not.
and the lord said unto me they have well spoken that which
they have spoken.
I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren like
unto thee and will put my words in his mouth and he shall
speak unto them all that I shall command him.
and it shall come to pass that whosoever will not hearken
unto my words which he shall speak in my name I will require
it of him.
but the prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my
name which I have not commanded him to speak or that shall
speak in the name of other gods even that prophet shall die.
and if thou say in thine heart how shall we know the word
which the lord hath not spoken?
when a prophet speaketh in the name of the lord if the thing
follow not nor come to pass that is the thing which the lord
hath not spoken but the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously thou shalt not be afraid of him.
when the lord thy God hath cut off the nations whose land the
lord thy God giveth thee and thou succeedest them and
dwellest in their cities and in their houses
thou shalt separate three cities for thee in the midst of thy
land which the lord thy God giveth thee to possess it.
thou shalt prepare thee a way and divide the coasts of thy
land which the lord thy God giveth thee to inherit into
three parts that every slayer may flee thither.
and this is the case of the slayer which shall flee thither
that he may live whoso killeth his neighbour ignorantly whom
he hated not in time past
as when a man goeth into the wood with his neighbour to Hew
wood and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut down
the tree and the head slippeth from the helve and lighteth
upon his neighbour that he die he shall flee unto one of
those cities and live
lest the avenger of the blood pursue the slayer while his
heart is hot and overtake him because the way is long and
slay him whereas he was not worthy of death inasmuch as he
hated him not in time past.
wherefore I command thee saying thou shalt separate three
cities for thee.
and if the lord thy God enlarge thy coast as he hath sworn
unto thy fathers and give thee all the land which he promised
to give unto thy fathers
if thou shalt keep all these commandments to do them which I
command thee this day to love the lord thy God and to walk
ever in his ways then shalt thou add three cities more for
thee beside these three
that innocent blood be not shed in thy land which the lord
thy God giveth thee for an inheritance and so blood be upon
thee.
but if any man hate his neighbour and lie in wait for him
and rise up against him and smite him mortally that he die
and fleeth into one of these cities
then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him thence
and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood that he
may die.
thine eye shall not pity him but thou shalt put away the
guilt of innocent blood from Israel that it may go well with
thee.
thou shalt not remove thy neighbour s landmark which they of
old time have set in thine inheritance which thou shalt
inherit in the land that the lord thy God giveth thee to
possess it.
one witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity
or for any Sin in any Sin that he sinneth at the mouth of
two witnesses or at the mouth of three witnesses shall the
matter be established.
if a false witness rise up against any man to testify against
him that which is wrong
then both the men between whom the controversy is shall
stand before the lord before the priests and the judges
which shall be in those days
and the judges shall make diligent inquisition and behold
if the witness be a false witness and hath testified falsely
against his brother
then shall ye do unto him as he had thought to have done unto
his brother so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.
and those which remain shall hear and fear and shall
henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.
and thine eye shall not pity but life shall go for life eye
for eye tooth for tooth hand for hand foot for foot.
when thou goest out to battle against thine enemies and seest
horses and chariots and a people more than thou be not
afraid of them for the lord thy God is with thee which
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
and it shall be when ye are come nigh unto the battle that
the priest shall approach and speak unto the people
and shall say unto them hear O Israel ye approach this day
unto battle against your enemies let not your hearts faint
fear not and do not tremble Neither be ye terrified because
of them
for the lord your God is he that goeth with you to fight for
you against your enemies to save you.
and the officers shall speak unto the people saying what man
is there that hath built a new house and hath not dedicated
it? let him go and return to his house lest he die in the
battle and another man dedicate it.
and what man is he that hath planted a vineyard and hath not
yet eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house
lest he die in the battle and another man eat of it.
and what man is there that hath betrothed a wife and hath not
taken her? let him go and return unto his house lest he die
in the battle and another man take her.
and the officers shall speak further unto the people and they
shall say what man is there that is fearful and fainthearted?
let him go and return unto his house lest his brethren s
heart faint as well as his heart.
and it shall be when the officers have made an end of
speaking unto the people that they shall make captains of the
armies to lead the people.
when thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it then
proclaim peace unto it.
and it shall be if it make thee answer of peace and open
unto thee then it shall be that all the people that is found
therein shall be tributaries unto thee and they shall serve
thee.
and if it will make no peace with thee but will make war
against thee then thou shalt besiege it
and when the lord thy God hath delivered it into thine hands
thou shalt smite every Male thereof with the edge of the
sword
but the women and the little ones and the cattle and all
that is in the city even all the spoil thereof shalt thou
take unto thyself and thou shalt eat the spoil of thine
enemies which the lord thy God hath given thee.
thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off
from thee which are not of the cities of these nations.
but of the cities of these people which the lord thy God doth
give thee for an inheritance thou shalt save alive nothing
that breatheth
but thou shalt utterly destroy them namely the Hittites and
the Amorites the Canaanites and the Perizzites the Hivites
and the Jebusites as the lord thy God hath commanded thee
that they teach you not to do after all their abominations
which they have done unto their gods so should ye Sin against
the lord your God.
when thou shalt besiege a city a long time in making war
against it to take it thou shalt not destroy the trees
thereof by forcing an axe against them for thou mayest eat of
them and thou shalt not cut them down for the tree of the
field is man s life to employ them in the siege
only the trees which thou knowest that they be not trees for
meat thou shalt destroy and cut them down and thou shalt
build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee
until it be subdued.
if one be found slain in the land which the lord thy God
giveth thee to possess it lying in the field and it be not
known who hath slain him
then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth and they
shall measure unto the cities which are round about him that
is slain
and it shall be that the city which is next unto the slain
man even the elders of that city shall take an heifer which
hath not been wrought with and which hath not drawn in the
yoke
and the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a
rough valley which is Neither eared nor sown and shall
strike off the heifer s neck there in the valley
and the priests the sons of Levi shall come near for them the
lord thy God hath chosen to minister unto him and to bless in
the name of the lord and by their word shall every
controversy and every stroke be tried
and all the elders of that city that are next unto the slain
man shall wash their hands over the heifer that is beheaded
in the valley
and they shall answer and say our hands have not shed this
blood Neither have our eyes seen it.
be merciful O lord unto thy people Israel whom thou hast
redeemed and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of
Israel s charge. and the blood shall be forgiven them.
so shalt thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among
you when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of
the lord.
when thou goest forth to war against thine enemies and the
lord thy God hath delivered them into thine hands and thou
hast taken them captive
and seest among the captives a beautiful woman and hast a
desire unto her that thou wouldest have her to thy wife
then thou shalt bring her home to thine house and she shall
shave her head and pare her nails
and she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her
and shall remain in thine house and bewail her father and her
mother a full month and after that thou shalt go in unto her
and be her husband and she shall be thy wife.
and it shall be if thou have no delight in her then thou
shalt let her go whither she will but thou shalt not sell her
at all for money thou shalt not make merchandise of her
because thou hast humbled her.
if a man have two wives one beloved and another hated and
they have born him children both the beloved and the hated
and if the firstborn son be hers that was hated
then it shall be when he maketh his sons to inherit that
which he hath that he may not make the son of the beloved
firstborn before the son of the hated which is indeed the
firstborn
but he shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the
firstborn by giving him a double portion of all that he hath
for he is the beginning of his strength the right of the
firstborn is his.
if a man have a stubborn and rebellious son which will not
obey the voice of his father or the voice of his mother and
that when they have chastened him will not hearken unto
them
then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him and
bring him out unto the elders of his city and unto the gate
of his place
and they shall say unto the elders of his city this our son
is stubborn and rebellious he will not obey our voice he is
a glutton and a drunkard.
and all the men of his city shall stone him with stones that
he die so shalt thou put evil away from among you and all
Israel shall hear and fear.
and if a man have committed a Sin worthy of death and he be
to be put to death and thou hang him on a tree
his body shall not remain all night upon the tree but thou
shalt in any wise bury him that day for he that is hanged is
accursed of God that thy land be not defiled which the lord
thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.
thou shalt not see thy brother s ox or his sheep go astray
and hide thyself from them thou shalt in any case bring them
again unto thy brother.
and if thy brother be not nigh unto thee or if thou know him
not then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house and it
shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it and thou
shalt restore it to him again.
in like manner shalt thou do with his ass and so shalt thou
do with his raiment and with all lost thing of thy brother s
which he hath lost and thou hast found shalt thou do
likewise thou mayest not hide thyself.
thou shalt not see thy brother s ass or his ox fall down by
the way and hide thyself from them thou shalt surely help
him to lift them up again.
the woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man
Neither shall a man put on a woman s garment for all that do
so are abomination unto the lord thy God.
if a bird s nest chance to be before thee in the way in any
tree or on the ground whether they be young ones or eggs
and the dam sitting upon the young or upon the eggs thou
shalt not take the dam with the young
but thou shalt in any wise let the dam go and take the young
to thee that it may be well with thee and that thou mayest
prolong thy days.
when thou buildest a new house then thou shalt make a
battlement for thy roof that thou bring not blood upon thine
house if any man fall from thence.
thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds lest the
fruit of thy seed which thou hast sown and the fruit of thy
vineyard be defiled.
thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together.
thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts as of woollen
and linen together.
thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters of thy
vesture wherewith thou coverest thyself.
if any man take a wife and go in unto her and hate her
and give occasions of speech against her and bring up an evil
name upon her and say I took this woman and when I came to
her I found her not a maid
then shall the father of the damsel and her mother take and
bring forth the tokens of the damsel s virginity unto the
elders of the city in the gate
and the damsel s father shall say unto the elders I gave my
daughter unto this man to wife and he hateth her
and lo he hath given occasions of speech against her
saying I found not thy daughter a maid and yet these are the
tokens of my daughter s virginity. and they shall spread the
cloth before the elders of the city.
and the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise
him
and they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of Silver and
give them unto the father of the damsel because he hath
brought up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel and she shall
be his wife he may not put her away all his days.
but if this thing be true and the tokens of virginity be not
found for the damsel
then they shall bring out the damsel to the door of her
father s house and the men of her city shall stone her with
stones that she die because she hath wrought folly in Israel
to play the whore in her father s house so shalt thou put
evil away from among you.
if a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband
then they shall both of them die both the man that lay with
the woman and the woman so shalt thou put away evil from
Israel.
if a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband and
a man find her in the city and lie with her
then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that city
and ye shall stone them with stones that they die the damsel
because she cried not being in the city and the man because
he hath humbled his neighbour s wife so thou shalt put away
evil from among you.
but if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field and the man
force her and lie with her then the man only that lay with
her shall die.
but unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing there is in the
damsel no Sin worthy of death for as when a man riseth
against his neighbour and slayeth him even so is this
matter
for he found her in the field and the betrothed damsel cried
and there was none to save her.
if a man find a damsel that is a virgin which is not
betrothed and lay hold on her and lie with her and they be
found
then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel s
father fifty shekels of Silver and she shall be his wife
because he hath humbled her he may not put her away all his
days.
a man shall not take his father s wife nor discover his
father s skirt.
he that is wounded in the stones or hath his privy member cut
off shall not enter into the congregation of the lord.
a bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the lord
even to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the
congregation of the lord.
an Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation
of the lord even to their tenth generation shall they not
enter into the congregation of the lord for ever
because they met you not with bread and with water in the way
when ye came forth out of Egypt and because they hired
against thee Balaam the son of Beor of Pethor of Mesopotamia
to curse thee.
nevertheless the lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam
but the lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto
thee because the lord thy God loved thee.
thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy
days for ever.
thou shalt not abhor an Edomite for he is thy brother thou
shalt not abhor an Egyptian because thou wast a stranger in
his land.
the children that are begotten of them shall enter into the
congregation of the lord in their third generation.
when the host goeth forth against thine enemies then keep
thee from every wicked thing.
if there be among you any man that is not clean by reason of
uncleanness that chanceth him by night then shall he go
abroad out of the camp he shall not come within the camp
but it shall be when evening cometh on he shall wash himself
with water and when the sun is down he shall come into the
camp again.
thou shalt have a place also without the camp whither thou
shalt go forth abroad
and thou shalt have a paddle upon thy weapon and it shall be
when thou wilt ease thyself abroad thou shalt dig therewith
and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh from thee
for the lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp to
deliver thee and to give up thine enemies before thee
therefore shall thy camp be holy that he see no unclean thing
in thee and turn away from thee.
thou shalt not deliver unto his Master the servant which is
escaped from his Master unto thee
he shall dwell with thee even among you in that place which
he shall choose in one of thy gates where it liketh him best
thou shalt not oppress him.
there shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel nor a
sodomite of the sons of Israel.
thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore or the price of a
dog into the house of the lord thy God for any vow for even
both these are abomination unto the lord thy God.
thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother usury of money
usury of victuals usury of any thing that is lent upon usury
unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury but unto thy
brother thou shalt not lend upon usury that the lord thy God
may bless thee in all that thou settest thine hand to in the
land whither thou goest to possess it.
when thou shalt vow a vow unto the lord thy God thou shalt
not slack to pay it for the lord thy God will surely require
it of thee and it would be Sin in thee.
but if thou shalt forbear to vow it shall be no Sin in thee.
that which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and
perform even a freewill offering according as thou hast
vowed unto the lord thy God which thou hast promised with thy
mouth.
when thou comest into thy neighbour s vineyard then thou
mayest eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure but thou
shalt not put any in thy vessel.
when thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour then
thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand but thou shalt not
move a sickle unto thy neighbour s standing corn.
when a man hath taken a wife and married her and it come to
pass that she find no favour in his eyes because he hath
found some uncleanness in her then let him write her a bill
of divorcement and give it in her hand and send her out of
his house.
and when she is departed out of his house she may go and be
another man s wife.
and if the latter husband hate her and write her a bill of
divorcement and giveth it in her hand and sendeth her out of
his house or if the latter husband die which took her to be
his wife
her former husband which sent her away may not take her
again to be his wife after that she is defiled for that is
abomination before the lord and thou shalt not cause the land
to Sin which the lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.
when a man hath taken a new wife he shall not go out to war
Neither shall he be charged with any business but he shall be
free at home one year and shall cheer up his wife which he
hath taken.
no man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge
for he taketh a man s life to pledge.
if a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children
of Israel and maketh merchandise of him or selleth him then
that thief shall die and thou shalt put evil away from among
you.
take heed in the plague of leprosy that thou observe
diligently and do according to all that the priests the
Levites shall teach you as I commanded them so ye shall
observe to do.
remember what the lord thy God did unto Miriam by the way
after that ye were come forth out of Egypt.
when thou dost lend thy brother any thing thou shalt not go
into his house to fetch his pledge.
thou shalt stand abroad and the man to whom thou dost lend
shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.
and if the man be poor thou shalt not sleep with his pledge
in any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the
sun goeth down that he may sleep in his own raiment and
bless thee and it shall be righteousness unto thee before the
lord thy God.
thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and
needy whether he be of thy brethren or of thy strangers that
are in thy land within thy gates
at his day thou shalt give him his hire Neither shall the sun
go down upon it for he is poor and setteth his heart upon
it lest he cry against thee unto the lord and it be Sin unto
thee.
the fathers shall not be put to death for the children
Neither shall the children be put to death for the fathers
every man shall be put to death for his own Sin.
thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger nor of
the fatherless nor take a widow s raiment to pledge
but thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt and
the lord thy God redeemed thee thence therefore I command
thee to do this thing.
when thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field and hast
forgot a sheaf in the field thou shalt not go again to fetch
it it shall be for the stranger for the fatherless and for
the widow that the lord thy God may bless thee in all the
work of thine hands.
when thou beatest thine olive tree thou shalt not go over the
boughs again it shall be for the stranger for the
fatherless and for the widow.
when thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard thou shalt not
glean it afterward it shall be for the stranger for the
fatherless and for the widow.
and thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land
of Egypt therefore I command thee to do this thing.
if there be a controversy between men and they come unto
judgment that the judges may judge them then they shall
justify the righteous and condemn the wicked.
and it shall be if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten
that the judge shall cause him to lie down and to be beaten
before his face according to his fault by a certain number.
forty stripes he may give him and not exceed lest if he
should exceed and beat him above these with many stripes
then thy brother should seem vile unto thee.
thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn.
if brethren dwell together and one of them die and have no
child the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a
stranger her husband s brother shall go in unto her and take
her to him to wife and perform the duty of an husband s
brother unto her.
and it shall be that the firstborn which she beareth shall
succeed in the name of his brother which is dead that his
name be not put out of Israel.
and if the man like not to take his brother s wife then let
his brother s wife go up to the gate unto the elders and say
my husband s brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a
name in Israel he will not perform the duty of my husband s
brother.
then the elders of his city shall call him and speak unto
him and if he stand to it and say I like not to take her
then shall his brother s wife come unto him in the presence of
the elders and loose his shoe from off his foot and spit in
his face and shall answer and say so shall it be done unto
that man that will not build up his brother s house.
and his name shall be called in Israel the house of him that
hath his shoe loosed.
when men strive together one with another and the wife of the
one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of
him that smiteth him and putteth forth her hand and taketh
him by the secrets
then thou shalt cut off her hand thine eye shall not pity
her.
thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights a great and a
small.
thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures a great
and a small.
but thou shalt have a perfect and just weight a perfect and
just measure shalt thou have that thy days may be lengthened
in the land which the lord thy God giveth thee.
for all that do such things and all that do unrighteously
are an abomination unto the lord thy God.
remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way when ye were
come forth out of Egypt
how he met thee by the way and smote the hindmost of thee
even all that were feeble behind thee when thou wast faint
and weary and he feared not God.
therefore it shall be when the lord thy God hath given thee
rest from all thine enemies round about in the land which the
lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it
that thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under
heaven thou shalt not forget it.
and it shall be when thou art come in unto the land which the
lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance and possessest
it and dwellest therein
that thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the
earth which thou shalt bring of thy land that the lord thy
God giveth thee and shalt put it in a basket and shalt go
unto the place which the lord thy God shall choose to place
his name there.
and thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days
and say unto him I profess this day unto the lord thy God
that I Am come unto the country which the lord sware unto our
fathers for to give us.
and the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand and
set it down before the altar of the lord thy God.
and thou shalt speak and say before the lord thy God a Syrian
ready to perish was my father and he went down into Egypt
and sojourned there with a few and became there a nation
great Mighty and populous
and the Egyptians evil entreated us and afflicted us and
laid upon us hard bondage
and when we cried unto the lord God of our fathers the lord
heard our voice and looked on our affliction and our labour
and our oppression
and the lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a Mighty hand
and with an outstretched arm and with great terribleness and
with signs and with wonders
and he hath brought us into this place and hath given us this
land even a land that floweth with milk and honey.
and now behold I have brought the firstfruits of the land
which thou O lord hast given me. and thou shalt set it
before the lord thy God and worship before the lord thy God
and thou shalt rejoice in every good thing which the lord thy
God hath given unto thee and unto thine house thou and the
Levite and the stranger that is among you.
when thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine
increase the third year which is the year of tithing and
hast given it unto the Levite the stranger the fatherless
and the widow that they may eat within thy gates and be
filled
then thou shalt say before the lord thy God I have brought
away the hallowed things out of mine house and also have
given them unto the Levite and unto the stranger to the
fatherless and to the widow according to all thy
commandments which thou hast commanded me I have not
transgressed thy commandments Neither have I forgotten them.
I have not eaten thereof in my mourning Neither have I taken
away ought thereof for any unclean use nor given ought
thereof for the dead but I have hearkened to the voice of the
lord my God and have done according to all that thou hast
commanded me.
look down from thy holy habitation from heaven and bless thy
people Israel and the land which thou hast given us as thou
swarest unto our fathers a land that floweth with milk and
honey.
this day the lord thy God hath commanded thee to do these
statutes and judgments thou shalt therefore keep and do them
with all thine heart and with all thy soul.
thou hast avouched the lord this day to be thy God and to
walk in his ways and to keep his statutes and his
commandments and his judgments and to hearken unto his
voice
and the lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar
people as he hath promised thee and that thou shouldest keep
all his commandments
and to make thee high above all nations which he hath made in
praise and in name and in honour and that thou mayest be an
holy people unto the lord thy God as he hath spoken.
and Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people
saying keep all the commandments which I command you this
day.
and it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto
the land which the lord thy God giveth thee that thou shalt
set thee up great stones and plaister them with plaister
and thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law when
thou art passed over that thou mayest go in unto the land
which the lord thy God giveth thee a land that floweth with
milk and honey as the lord God of thy fathers hath promised
thee.
therefore it shall be when ye be gone over Jordan that ye
shall set up these stones which I command you this day in
mount ebal and thou shalt plaister them with plaister.
and there shalt thou build an altar unto the lord thy God an
altar of stones thou shalt not lift up any Iron tool upon
them.
thou shalt build the altar of the lord thy God of whole
stones and thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the
lord thy God
and thou shalt offer peace offerings and shalt eat there and
rejoice before the lord thy God.
and thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law
very plainly.
and Moses and the priests the Levites spake unto all Israel
saying take heed and hearken O Israel this day thou art
become the people of the lord thy God.
thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the lord thy God and
do his commandments and his statutes which I command thee
this day.
and Moses charged the people the same day saying
these shall stand upon mount Gerizim to bless the people when
ye are come over Jordan Simeon and Levi and Judah and
Issachar and Joseph and Benjamin
and these shall stand upon mount ebal to curse Reuben Gad
and Asher and Zebulun Dan and Naphtali.
and the Levites shall speak and say unto all the men of
Israel with a loud voice
cursed be the man that maketh any graven or molten image an
abomination unto the lord the work of the hands of the
craftsman and putteth it in a secret place. and all the
people shall answer and say Amen.
cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother.
and all the people shall say Amen.
cursed be he that removeth his neighbour s landmark. and all
the people shall say Amen.
cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way.
and all the people shall say Amen.
cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger
fatherless and widow. and all the people shall say Amen.
cursed be he that lieth with his father s wife because he
uncovereth his father s skirt. and all the people shall say
Amen.
cursed be he that lieth with any manner of beast. and all the
people shall say Amen.
cursed be he that lieth with his sister the daughter of his
father or the daughter of his mother. and all the people
shall say Amen.
cursed be he that lieth with his mother in law. and all the
people shall say Amen.
cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly. and all the
people shall say Amen.
cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person.
and all the people shall say Amen.
cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to
do them. and all the people shall say Amen.
and it shall come to pass if thou shalt hearken diligently
unto the voice of the lord thy God to observe and to do all
his commandments which I command thee this day that the lord
thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth
and all these blessings shall come on thee and overtake thee
if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the lord thy God.
blessed shalt thou be in the city and blessed shalt thou be
in the field.
blessed shall be the fruit of thy body and the fruit of thy
ground and the fruit of thy cattle the increase of thy kine
and the flocks of thy sheep.
blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.
blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in and blessed shalt
thou be when thou goest out.
the lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee
to be smitten before thy face they shall come out against
thee one way and flee before thee seven ways.
the lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy
storehouses and in all that thou settest thine hand unto and
he shall bless thee in the land which the lord thy God giveth
thee.
the lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself as
he hath sworn unto thee if thou shalt keep the commandments
of the lord thy God and walk in his ways.
and all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by
the name of the lord and they shall be afraid of thee.
and the lord shall make thee plenteous in goods in the fruit
of thy body and in the fruit of thy cattle and in the fruit
of thy ground in the land which the lord sware unto thy
fathers to give thee.
the lord shall open unto thee his good treasure the heaven to
give the rain unto thy land in his season and to bless all
the work of thine hand and thou shalt lend unto many nations
and thou shalt not borrow.
and the lord shall make thee the head and not the tail and
thou shalt be above only and thou shalt not be beneath if
that thou hearken unto the commandments of the lord thy God
which I command thee this day to observe and to do them
and thou shalt not go aside from any of the words which I
command thee this day to the right hand or to the left to
go after other gods to serve them.
but it shall come to pass if thou wilt not hearken unto the
voice of the lord thy God to observe to do all his
commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day
that all these curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee
cursed shalt thou be in the city and cursed shalt thou be in
the field.
cursed shall be thy basket and thy store.
cursed shall be the fruit of thy body and the fruit of thy
land the increase of thy kine and the flocks of thy sheep.
cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in and cursed shalt
thou be when thou goest out.
the lord shall send upon thee cursing vexation and rebuke
in all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do until thou
be destroyed and until thou perish quickly because of the
wickedness of thy doings whereby thou hast forsaken me.
the lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee until he
have consumed thee from off the land whither thou goest to
possess it.
the lord shall smite thee with a consumption and with a
fever and with an inflammation and with an extreme burning
and with the sword and with blasting and with mildew and
they shall pursue thee until thou perish.
and thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass and the
earth that is under thee shall be Iron.
the lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust from
heaven shall it come down upon thee until thou be destroyed.
the lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies
thou shalt go out one way against them and flee seven ways
before them and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of the
earth.
and thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air and
unto the beasts of the earth and no man shall fray them away.
the lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt and with the
emerods and with the scab and with the itch whereof thou
canst not be healed.
the lord shall smite thee with madness and blindness and
astonishment of heart
and thou shalt grope at noonday as the blind gropeth in
darkness and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways and thou
shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore and no man shall
save thee.
thou shalt betroth a wife and another man shall lie with her
thou shalt build an house and thou shalt not dwell therein
thou shalt plant a vineyard and shalt not gather the grapes
thereof.
thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes and thou shalt not
eat thereof thine ass shall be violently taken away from
before thy face and shall not be restored to thee thy sheep
shall be given unto thine enemies and thou shalt have none to
rescue them.
thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people
and thine eyes shall look and fail with longing for them all
the day long and there shall be no might in thine hand.
the fruit of thy land and all thy labours shall a nation
which thou knowest not eat up and thou shalt be only
oppressed and crushed alway
so that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes which
thou shalt see.
the lord shall smite thee in the knees and in the legs with
a sore botch that cannot be healed from the sole of thy foot
unto the top of thy head.
the lord shall bring thee and thy king which thou shalt set
over thee unto a nation which Neither thou nor thy fathers
have known and there shalt thou serve other gods wood and
stone.
and thou shalt become an astonishment a proverb and a
byword among all nations whither the lord shall lead thee.
thou shalt carry Much seed out into the field and shalt
gather but little in for the locust shall consume it.
thou shalt plant vineyards and dress them but shalt Neither
drink of the wine nor gather the grapes for the worms shall
eat them.
thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts but
thou shalt not anoint thyself with the oil for thine olive
shall cast his fruit.
thou shalt beget sons and daughters but thou shalt not enjoy
them for they shall go into captivity.
all thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume.
the stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very
high and thou shalt come down very low.
he shall lend to thee and thou shalt not lend to him he
shall be the head and thou shalt be the tail.
moreover all these curses shall come upon thee and shall
pursue thee and overtake thee till thou be destroyed
because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the lord thy
God to keep his commandments and his statutes which he
commanded thee
and they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder and
upon thy seed for ever.
because thou servedst not the lord thy God with joyfulness
and with gladness of heart for the abundance of all things
therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the lord shall
send against thee in hunger and in thirst and in nakedness
and in want of all things and he shall put a yoke of Iron
upon thy neck until he have destroyed thee.
the lord shall bring a nation against thee from far from the
end of the earth as swift as the eagle flieth a nation whose
tongue thou shalt not understand
a nation of fierce countenance which shall not regard the
person of the old nor shew favour to the young
and he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle and the fruit of thy
land until thou be destroyed which also shall not leave thee
either corn wine or oil or the increase of thy kine or
flocks of thy sheep until he have destroyed thee.
and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates until thy high and
fenced walls come down wherein thou trustedst throughout all
thy land and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates
throughout all thy land which the lord thy God hath given
thee.
and thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body the flesh of
thy sons and of thy daughters which the lord thy God hath
given thee in the siege and in the straitness wherewith
thine enemies shall distress thee
so that the man that is tender among you and very delicate
his eye shall be evil toward his brother and toward the wife
of his bosom and toward the remnant of his children which he
shall leave
so that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his
children whom he shall eat because he hath nothing left him
in the siege and in the straitness wherewith thine enemies
shall distress thee in all thy gates.
the tender and delicate woman among you which would not
adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for
delicateness and tenderness her eye shall be evil toward the
husband of her bosom and toward her son and toward her
daughter
and toward her young one that cometh out from between her
feet and toward her children which she shall bear for she
shall eat them for want of all things secretly in the siege
and straitness wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in
thy gates.
if thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that
are written in this book that thou mayest fear this glorious
and fearful name the lord thy God
then the lord will make thy plagues wonderful and the plagues
of thy seed even great plagues and of long continuance and
sore sicknesses and of long continuance.
moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt
which thou wast afraid of and they shall cleave unto thee.
also every sickness and every plague which is not written in
the book of this law them will the lord bring upon thee
until thou be destroyed.
and ye shall be left few in number whereas ye were as the
stars of heaven for multitude because thou wouldest not obey
the voice of the lord thy God.
and it shall come to pass that as the lord rejoiced over you
to do you good and to multiply you so the lord will rejoice
over you to destroy you and to bring you to nought and ye
shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest to
possess it.
and the lord shall scatter thee among all people from the one
end of the earth even unto the other and there thou shalt
serve other gods which Neither thou nor thy fathers have
known even wood and stone.
and among these nations shalt thou find no ease Neither shall
the sole of thy foot have rest but the lord shall give thee
there a trembling heart and failing of eyes and sorrow of
mind
and thy life shall hang in doubt before thee and thou shalt
fear day and night and shalt have none assurance of thy life
in the morning thou shalt say would God it were even and at
even thou shalt say would God it were morning for the fear
of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear and for the sight of
thine eyes which thou shalt see.
and the lord shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships by
the way whereof I spake unto thee thou shalt see it no more
again and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for
bondmen and bondwomen and no man shall buy you.
these are the words of the covenant which the lord commanded
Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab
beside the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.
and Moses called unto all Israel and said unto them ye have
seen all that the lord did before your eyes in the land of
Egypt unto Pharaoh and unto all his servants and unto all
his land
the great temptations which thine eyes have seen the signs
and those great miracles
yet the lord hath not given you an heart to perceive and eyes
to see and ears to hear unto this day.
and I have led you forty years in the wilderness your clothes
are not waxen old upon you and thy shoe is not waxen old upon
thy foot.
ye have not eaten bread Neither have ye drunk wine or strong
drink that ye might know that I Am the lord your God.
and when ye came unto this place Sihon the king of Heshbon
and Og the king of Bashan came out against us unto battle
and we smote them
and we took their land and gave it for an inheritance unto
the Reubenites and to the Gadites and to the half tribe of
Manasseh.
keep therefore the words of this covenant and do them that
ye may prosper in all that ye do.
ye stand this day all of you before the lord your God your
captains of your tribes your elders and your officers with
all the men of Israel
your little ones your wives and thy stranger that is in thy
camp from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water
that thou shouldest enter into covenant with the lord thy God
and into his oath which the lord thy God maketh with thee
this day
that he may establish thee to day for a people unto himself
and that he may be unto thee a God as he hath said unto thee
and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers to Abraham to Isaac
and to Jacob.
Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath
but with him that standeth here with us this day before the
lord our God and also with him that is not here with us this
day
 for ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt and how
we came through the nations which ye passed by
and ye have seen their abominations and their idols wood and
stone Silver and gold which were among them
lest there should be among you man or woman or family or
tribe whose heart turneth away this day from the lord our
God to go and serve the gods of these nations lest there
should be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood
and it come to pass when he heareth the words of this curse
that he bless himself in his heart saying I shall have
peace though I walk in the imagination of mine heart to add
drunkenness to thirst
the lord will not spare him but then the anger of the lord
and his jealousy shall smoke against that man and all the
curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him and
the lord shall blot out his name from under heaven.
and the lord shall separate him unto evil out of all the
tribes of Israel according to all the curses of the covenant
that are written in this book of the law
so that the generation to come of your children that shall
rise up after you and the stranger that shall come from a far
land shall say when they see the plagues of that land and
the sicknesses which the lord hath laid upon it
and that the whole land thereof is brimstone and salt and
burning that it is not sown nor beareth nor any grass
groweth therein like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah
Admah and Zeboim which the lord overthrew in his anger and
in his wrath
even all nations shall say wherefore hath the lord done thus
unto this land? what meaneth the heat of this great anger?
then men shall say because they have forsaken the covenant of
the lord God of their fathers which he made with them when he
brought them forth out of the land of Egypt
for they went and served other gods and worshipped them gods
whom they knew not and whom he had not given unto them
and the anger of the lord was kindled against this land to
bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book
and the lord rooted them out of their land in anger and in
wrath and in great indignation and cast them into another
land as it is this day.
the secret things belong unto the lord our God but those
things which are revealed belong unto us and to our children
for ever that we may do all the words of this law.
and it shall come to pass when all these things are come upon
thee the blessing and the curse which I have set before
thee and thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations
whither the lord thy God hath driven thee
and shalt return unto the lord thy God and shalt obey his
voice according to all that I command thee this day thou and
thy children with all thine heart and with all thy soul
that then the lord thy God will turn thy captivity and have
compassion upon thee and will return and gather thee from all
the nations whither the lord thy God hath scattered thee.
if any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of
heaven from thence will the lord thy God gather thee and
from thence will he fetch thee
and the lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy
fathers possessed and thou shalt possess it and he will do
thee good and multiply thee above thy fathers.
and the lord thy God will circumcise thine heart and the
heart of thy seed to love the lord thy God with all thine
heart and with all thy soul that thou mayest live.
and the lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine
enemies and on them that hate thee which persecuted thee.
and thou shalt return and obey the voice of the lord and do
all his commandments which I command thee this day.
and the lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of
thine hand in the fruit of thy body and in the fruit of thy
cattle and in the fruit of thy land for good for the lord
will again rejoice over thee for good as he rejoiced over thy
fathers
if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the lord thy God to
keep his commandments and his statutes which are written in
this book of the law and if thou turn unto the lord thy God
with all thine heart and with all thy soul.
for this commandment which I command thee this day it is not
hidden from thee Neither is it far off.
it is not in heaven that thou shouldest say who shall go up
for us to heaven and bring it unto us that we may hear it
and do it?
Neither is it beyond the sea that thou shouldest say who
shall go over the sea for us and bring it unto us that we
may hear it and do it?
but the word is very nigh unto thee in thy mouth and in thy
heart that thou mayest do it.
see I have set before thee this day life and good and death
and evil
in that I command thee this day to love the lord thy God to
walk in his ways and to keep his commandments and his
statutes and his judgments that thou mayest live and
multiply and the lord thy God shall bless thee in the land
whither thou goest to possess it.
but if thine heart turn away so that thou wilt not hear but
shalt be drawn away and worship other gods and serve them
I denounce unto you this day that ye shall surely perish and
that ye shall not prolong your days upon the land whither
thou passest over Jordan to go to possess it.
I call heaven and earth to record this day against you that I
have set before you life and death blessing and cursing
therefore choose life that both thou and thy seed may live
that thou mayest love the lord thy God and that thou mayest
obey his voice and that thou mayest cleave unto him for he
is thy life and the length of thy days that thou mayest
dwell in the land which the lord sware unto thy fathers to
Abraham to Isaac and to Jacob to give them.
and Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel.
and he said unto them I Am an hundred and twenty years old
this day I can no more go out and come in also the lord hath
said unto me thou shalt not go over this Jordan.
the lord thy God he will go over before thee and he will
destroy these nations from before thee and thou shalt possess
them and Joshua he shall go over before thee as the lord
hath said.
and the lord shall do unto them as he did to Sihon and to Og
kings of the Amorites and unto the land of them whom he
destroyed.
and the lord shall give them up before your face that ye may
do unto them according unto all the commandments which I have
commanded you.
be strong and of a good courage fear not nor be afraid of
them for the lord thy God he it is that doth go with thee
he will not fail thee nor forsake thee.
and Moses called unto Joshua and said unto him in the sight
of all Israel be strong and of a good courage for thou must
go with this people unto the land which the lord hath sworn
unto their fathers to give them and thou shalt cause them to
inherit it.
and the lord he it is that doth go before thee he will be
with thee he will not fail thee Neither forsake thee fear
not Neither be dismayed.
and Moses wrote this law and delivered it unto the priests
the sons of Levi which bare the ark of the covenant of the
lord and unto all the elders of Israel.
and Moses commanded them saying at the end of every seven
years in the solemnity of the year of release in the feast
of tabernacles
when all Israel is come to appear before the lord thy God in
the place which he shall choose thou shalt read this law
before all Israel in their hearing.
gather the people together men and women and children and
thy stranger that is within thy gates that they may hear and
that they may learn and fear the lord your God and observe
to do all the words of this law
and that their children which have not known any thing may
hear and learn to fear the lord your God as long as ye live
in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.
and the lord said unto Moses behold thy days approach that
thou must die call Joshua and present yourselves in the
tabernacle of the congregation that I may give him a charge.
and Moses and Joshua went and presented themselves in the
tabernacle of the congregation.
and the lord appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a
cloud and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the
tabernacle.
and the lord said unto Moses behold thou shalt sleep with
thy fathers and this people will rise up and go a whoring
after the gods of the strangers of the land whither they go
to be among them and will forsake me and break my covenant
which I have made with them.
then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day and I
will forsake them and I will hide my face from them and they
shall be devoured and many evils and troubles shall befall
them so that they will say in that day are not these evils
come upon us because our God is not among us?
and I will surely hide my face in that day for all the evils
which they shall have wrought in that they are turned unto
other gods.
now therefore write ye this song for you and teach it the
children of Israel put it in their mouths that this song may
be a witness for me against the children of Israel.
for when I shall have brought them into the land which I sware
unto their fathers that floweth with milk and honey and they
shall have eaten and filled themselves and waxen fat then
will they turn unto other gods and serve them and provoke
me and break my covenant.
and it shall come to pass when many evils and troubles are
befallen them that this song shall testify against them as a
witness for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of
their seed for I know their imagination which they go about
even now before I have brought them into the land which I
sware.
Moses therefore wrote this song the same day and taught it
the children of Israel.
and he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge and said be
strong and of a good courage for thou shalt bring the
children of Israel into the land which I sware unto them and
I will be with thee.
and it came to pass when Moses had made an end of writing the
words of this law in a book until they were finished
that Moses commanded the Levites which bare the ark of the
covenant of the lord saying
take this book of the law and put it in the side of the ark
of the covenant of the lord your God that it may be there for
a witness against thee.
for I know thy rebellion and thy stiff neck behold while I
Am yet alive with you this day ye have been rebellious
against the lord and how Much more after my death?
gather unto me all the elders of your tribes and your
officers that I may speak these words in their ears and call
heaven and earth to record against them.
for I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt
yourselves and turn aside from the way which I have commanded
you and evil will befall you in the latter days because ye
will do evil in the sight of the lord to provoke him to anger
through the work of your hands.
and Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel
the words of this song until they were ended.
give ear O ye heavens and I will speak and hear O earth
the words of my mouth.
my doctrine shall drop as the rain my speech shall distil as
the dew as the small rain upon the tender herb and as the
showers upon the grass
because I will publish the name of the lord ascribe ye
greatness unto our God.
he is the rock his work is perfect for all his ways are
judgment a God of truth and without iniquity just and right
is he.
they have corrupted themselves their spot is not the spot of
his children they are a perverse and crooked generation.
do ye thus requite the lord O foolish people and unwise? is
not he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made
thee and established thee?
remember the days of old consider the years of many
generations ask thy father and he will shew thee thy
elders and they will tell thee.
when the most high divided to the nations their inheritance
when he separated the sons of Adam he set the bounds of the
people according to the number of the children of Israel.
for the lord s portion is his people Jacob is the Lot of his
inheritance.
he found him in a desert land and in the waste howling
wilderness he led him about he instructed him he kept him
as the apple of his eye.
as an eagle stirreth up her nest fluttereth over her young
spreadeth abroad her wings taketh them beareth them on her
wings
so the lord alone did lead him and there was no strange God
with him.
he made him ride on the high places of the earth that he
might eat the increase of the fields and he made him to suck
honey out of the rock and oil out of the flinty rock
butter of kine and milk of sheep with fat of lambs and rams
of the breed of Bashan and goats with the fat of kidneys of
wheat and thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape.
but Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked thou art waxen fat thou
art grown thick thou art covered with fatness then he
forsook God which made him and lightly esteemed the rock of
his salvation.
they provoked him to jealousy with strange gods with
abominations provoked they him to anger.
they sacrificed unto devils not to God to gods whom they
knew not to new gods that came newly up whom your fathers
feared not.
of the rock that begat thee thou art unmindful and hast
forgotten God that formed thee.
and when the lord saw it he abhorred them because of the
provoking of his sons and of his daughters.
and he said I will hide my face from them I will see what
their end shall be for they are a very froward generation
children in whom is no faith.
they have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God
they have provoked me to anger with their vanities and I will
move them to jealousy with those which are not a people I
will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.
for a fire is kindled in mine anger and shall burn unto the
lowest hell and shall consume the earth with her increase
and set on fire the foundations of the mountains.
I will heap mischiefs upon them I will spend mine arrows upon
them.
they shall be burnt with hunger and devoured with burning
heat and with bitter destruction I will also send the teeth
of beasts upon them with the poison of serpents of the dust.
the sword without and terror within shall destroy both the
young man and the virgin the suckling also with the man of
gray hairs.
I said I would scatter them into corners I would make the
remembrance of them to cease from among men
were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy lest their
adversaries should behave themselves strangely and lest they
should say our hand is high and the lord hath not done all
this.
for they are a nation void of counsel Neither is there any
understanding in them.
O that they were wise that they understood this that they
would consider their latter end
how should one chase a thousand and two put Ten thousand to
flight except their rock had sold them and the lord had shut
them up?
for their rock is not as our rock even our enemies themselves
being judges.
for their vine is of the vine of Sodom and of the fields of
Gomorrah their grapes are grapes of gall their clusters are
bitter
their wine is the poison of dragons and the cruel venom of
asps.
is not this laid up in store with me and sealed up among my
treasures?
to me belongeth vengeance and recompence their foot shall
slide in due time for the day of their calamity is at hand
and the things that shall come upon them make haste.
for the lord shall judge his people and repent himself for
his servants when he seeth that their power is gone and
there is none shut up or left.
and he shall say where are their gods their rock in whom
they trusted
which did eat the fat of their sacrifices and drank the wine
of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you and
be your protection.
see now that I even I Am he and there is no God with me I
kill and I make alive I wound and I heal Neither is there
any that can deliver out of my hand.
for I lift up my hand to heaven and say I live for ever.
if I whet my glittering sword and mine hand take hold on
judgment I will render vengeance to mine enemies and will
reward them that hate me.
I will make mine arrows drunk with blood and my sword shall
devour flesh and that with the blood of the slain and of the
captives from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.
rejoice O ye nations with his people for he will avenge the
blood of his servants and will render vengeance to his
adversaries and will be merciful unto his land and to his
people.
and Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the
ears of the people he and Hoshea the son of Nun.
and Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all
Israel
and he said unto them set your hearts unto all the words
which I testify among you this day which ye shall command
your children to observe to do all the words of this law.
for it is not a vain thing for you because it is your life
and through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land
whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.
and the lord spake unto Moses that selfsame day saying
get thee up into this mountain Abarim unto mount Nebo which
is in the land of Moab that is over against Jericho and
behold the land of Canaan which I give unto the children of
Israel for a possession
and die in the mount whither thou goest up and be gathered
unto thy people as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor and
was gathered unto his people
because ye trespassed against me among the children of Israel
at the waters of Meribahkadesh in the wilderness of Zin
because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of
Israel.
yet thou shalt see the land before thee but thou shalt not go
thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel.
and this is the blessing wherewith Moses the man of God
blessed the children of Israel before his death.
and he said the lord came from Sinai and rose up from Seir
unto them he shined forth from mount Paran and he came with
Ten thousands of saints from his right hand went a fiery law
for them.
yea he loved the people all his saints are in thy hand and
they sat down at thy feet every one shall receive of thy
words.
Moses commanded us a law even the inheritance of the
congregation of Jacob.
and he was king in Jeshurun when the heads of the people and
the tribes of Israel were gathered together.
let Reuben live and not die and let not his men be few.
and this is the blessing of Judah and he said hear lord
the voice of Judah and bring him unto his people let his
hands be sufficient for him and be thou an help to him from
his enemies.
and of Levi he said let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy
holy one whom thou didst prove at Massah and with whom thou
didst strive at the waters of Meribah
who said unto his father and to his mother I have not seen
him Neither did he acknowledge his brethren nor knew his own
children for they have observed thy word and kept thy
covenant.
they shall teach Jacob thy judgments and Israel thy law they
shall put incense before thee and whole burnt sacrifice upon
thine altar.
bless lord his substance and accept the work of his hands
smite through the loins of them that rise against him and of
them that hate him that they rise not again.
and of Benjamin he said the beloved of the lord shall dwell
in safety by him and the lord shall cover him all the day
long and he shall dwell between his shoulders.
and of Joseph he said blessed of the lord be his land for
the precious things of heaven for the dew and for the deep
that coucheth beneath
and for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun and for
the precious things put forth by the moon
and for the chief things of the ancient mountains and for the
precious things of the lasting hills
and for the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof
and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush let the
blessing come upon the head of Joseph and upon the top of the
head of him that was separated from his brethren.
his glory is like the firstling of his bullock and his horns
are like the horns of unicorns with them he shall push the
people together to the ends of the earth and they are the Ten
thousands of Ephraim and they are the thousands of Manasseh.
and of Zebulun he said rejoice Zebulun in thy going out
and Issachar in thy tents.
they shall call the people unto the mountain there they shall
offer sacrifices of righteousness for they shall suck of the
abundance of the seas and of treasures hid in the sand.
and of Gad he said blessed be he that enlargeth Gad he
dwelleth as a lion and teareth the arm with the crown of the
head.
and he provided the first part for himself because there in
a portion of the lawgiver was he seated and he came with the
heads of the people he executed the justice of the lord and
his judgments with Israel.
and of Dan he said Dan is a lion s whelp he shall leap from
Bashan.
and of Naphtali he said O Naphtali satisfied with favour
and full with the blessing of the lord possess thou the west
and the south.
and of Asher he said let Asher be blessed with children let
him be acceptable to his brethren and let him dip his foot in
oil.
thy shoes shall be Iron and brass and as thy days so shall
thy strength be.
there is none like unto the God of Jeshurun who rideth upon
the heaven in thy help and in his excellency on the sky.
the eternal God is thy refuge and underneath are the
everlasting arms and he shall thrust out the enemy from
before thee and shall say destroy them.
Israel then shall dwell in safety alone the fountain of Jacob
shall be upon a land of corn and wine also his heavens shall
drop down dew.
happy art thou O Israel who is like unto thee O people
saved by the lord the shield of thy help and who is the
sword of thy excellency and thine enemies shall be found
liars unto thee and thou shalt tread upon their high places.
and Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of
Nebo to the top of Pisgah that is over against Jericho. and
the lord shewed him all the land of Gilead unto Dan
and all Naphtali and the land of Ephraim and Manasseh and
all the land of Judah unto the utmost sea
and the south and the plain of the valley of Jericho the
city of palm trees unto Zoar.
and the lord said unto him this is the land which I sware
unto Abraham unto Isaac and unto Jacob saying I will give
it unto thy seed I have caused thee to see it with thine
eyes but thou shalt not go over thither.
so Moses the servant of the lord died there in the land of
Moab according to the word of the lord.
and he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab over
against Bethpeor but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto
this day.
and Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died
his eye was not dim nor his natural force abated.
and the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of
Moab thirty days so the days of weeping and mourning for
Moses were ended.
and Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom
for Moses had laid his hands upon him and the children of
Israel hearkened unto him and did as the lord commanded
Moses.
and there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses
whom the lord knew face to face
in all the signs and the wonders which the lord sent him to
do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh and to all his servants
and to all his land
and in all that Mighty hand and in all the great terror which
Moses shewed in the sight of all Israel.
now after the death of Moses the servant of the lord it came
to pass that the lord spake unto Joshua the son of Nun
Moses minister saying
Moses my servant is dead now therefore Arise go over this
Jordan thou and all this people unto the land which I do
give to them even to the children of Israel.
every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon that
have I given unto you as I said unto Moses.
from the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great
river the river Euphrates all the land of the Hittites and
unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun shall be
your coast.
there shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the
days of thy life as I was with Moses so I will be with thee
I will not fail thee nor forsake thee.
be strong and of a good courage for unto this people shalt
thou divide for an inheritance the land which I sware unto
their fathers to give them.
only be thou strong and very courageous that thou mayest
observe to do according to all the law which Moses my servant
commanded thee turn not from it to the right hand or to the
left that thou mayest prosper withersoever thou goest.
this book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth but
thou shalt meditate therein day and night that thou mayest
observe to do according to all that is written therein for
then thou shalt make thy way prosperous and then thou shalt
have good success.
have not I commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage be
not afraid Neither be thou dismayed for the lord thy God is
with thee whithersoever thou goest.
then Joshua commanded the officers of the people saying
pass through the host and command the people saying prepare
you victuals for within three days ye shall pass over this
Jordan to go in to possess the land which the lord your God
giveth you to possess it.
and to the Reubenites and to the Gadites and to half the
tribe of Manasseh spake Joshua saying
remember the word which Moses the servant of the lord
commanded you saying the lord your God hath given you rest
and hath given you this land.
your wives your little ones and your cattle shall remain in
the land which Moses gave you on this side Jordan but ye
shall pass before your brethren armed all the Mighty men of
valour and help them
until the lord have given your brethren rest as he hath given
you and they also have possessed the land which the lord your
God giveth them then ye shall return unto the land of your
possession and enjoy it which Moses the lord s servant gave
you on this side Jordan toward the sunrising.
and they answered Joshua saying all that thou commandest us
we will do and whithersoever thou sendest us we will go.
according as we hearkened unto Moses in all things so will we
hearken unto thee only the lord thy God be with thee as he
was with Moses.
whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment and
will not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest
him he shall be put to death only be strong and of a good
courage.
and Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy
secretly saying go view the land even Jericho. and they
went and came into an harlot s house named Rahab and lodged
there.
and it was told the king of Jericho saying behold there
came men in hither to night of the children of Israel to
search out the country.
and the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab saying bring forth
the men that are come to thee which are entered into thine
house for they be come to search out all the country.
and the woman took the two men and hid them and said thus
there came men unto me but I wist not whence they were
and it came to pass about the time of shutting of the gate
when it was dark that the men went out whither the men went
I wot not pursue after them quickly for ye shall overtake
them.
but she had brought them up to the roof of the house and hid
them with the stalks of flax which she had laid in order upon
the roof.
and the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the
fords and as soon as they which pursued after them were gone
out they shut the gate.
and before they were laid down she came up unto them upon the
roof
and she said unto the men I know that the lord hath given you
the land and that your terror is fallen upon us and that all
the inhabitants of the land faint because of you.
for we have heard how the lord dried up the water of the red
sea for you when ye came out of Egypt and what ye did unto
the two kings of the Amorites that were on the other side
Jordan Sihon and Og whom ye utterly destroyed.
and as soon as we had heard these things our hearts did melt
Neither did there remain any more courage in any man because
of you for the lord your God he is God in heaven above and
in earth beneath.
now therefore I pray you swear unto me by the lord since I
have shewed you kindness that ye will also shew kindness unto
my father s house and give me a true token
and that ye will save alive my father and my mother and my
brethren and my sisters and all that they have and deliver
our lives from death.
and the men answered her our life for yours if ye utter not
this our business. and it shall be when the lord hath given
us the land that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.
then she let them down by a cord through the window for her
house was upon the town wall and she dwelt upon the wall.
and she said unto them get you to the mountain lest the
pursuers meet you and hide yourselves there three days until
the pursuers be returned and afterward may ye go your way.
and the men said unto her we will be blameless of this thine
oath which thou hast made us swear.
behold when we come into the land thou shalt bind this line
of scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down
by and thou shalt bring thy father and thy mother and thy
brethren and all thy father s household home unto thee.
and it shall be that whosoever shall go out of the doors of
thy house into the street his blood shall be upon his head
and we will be guiltless and whosoever shall be with thee in
the house his blood shall be on our head if any hand be upon
him.
and if thou utter this our business then we will be quit of
thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.
and she said according unto your words so be it. and she
sent them away and they departed and she bound the scarlet
line in the window.
and they went and came unto the mountain and abode there
three days until the pursuers were returned and the pursuers
sought them throughout all the way but found them not.
so the two men returned and descended from the mountain and
passed over and came to Joshua the son of Nun and told him
all things that befell them
and they said unto Joshua truly the lord hath delivered into
our hands all the land for even all the inhabitants of the
country do faint because of us.
and Joshua rose early in the morning and they removed from
Shittim and came to Jordan he and all the children of
Israel and lodged there before they passed over.
and it came to pass after three days that the officers went
through the host
and they commanded the people saying when ye see the ark of
the covenant of the lord your God and the priests the Levites
bearing it then ye shall remove from your place and go after
it.
yet there shall be a space between you and it about two
thousand cubits by measure come not near unto it that ye may
know the way by which ye must go for ye have not passed this
way heretofore.
and Joshua said unto the people sanctify yourselves for to
morrow the lord will do wonders among you.
and Joshua spake unto the priests saying take up the ark of
the covenant and pass over before the people. and they took
up the ark of the covenant and went before the people.
and the lord said unto Joshua this day will I begin to
magnify thee in the sight of all Israel that they may know
that as I was with Moses so I will be with thee.
and thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the
covenant saying when ye are come to the brink of the water
of Jordan ye shall stand still in Jordan.
and Joshua said unto the children of Israel come hither and
hear the words of the lord your God.
and Joshua said hereby ye shall know that the living God is
among you and that he will without fail drive out from before
you the Canaanites and the Hittites and the Hivites and the
Perizzites and the Girgashites and the Amorites and the
Jebusites.
behold the ark of the covenant of the lord of all the earth
passeth over before you into Jordan.
now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel
out of every tribe a man.
and it shall come to pass as soon as the soles of the feet of
the priests that bear the ark of the lord the lord of all the
earth shall rest in the waters of Jordan that the waters of
Jordan shall be cut off from the waters that come down from
above and they shall stand upon an heap.
and it came to pass when the people removed from their tents
to pass over Jordan and the priests bearing the ark of the
covenant before the people
and as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan and the
feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim
of the water for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the
time of harvest
that the waters which came down from above stood and rose up
upon an heap very far from the city Adam that is beside
Zaretan and those that came down toward the sea of the plain
even the salt sea failed and were cut off and the people
passed over right against Jericho.
and the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the lord
stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan and all the
Israelites passed over on dry ground until all the people
were passed clean over Jordan.
and it came to pass when all the people were clean passed
over Jordan that the lord spake unto Joshua saying
take you twelve men out of the people out of every tribe a
man
and command ye them saying take you hence out of the midst
of Jordan out of the place where the priests feet stood
firm twelve stones and ye shall carry them over with you
and leave them in the lodging place where ye shall lodge this
night.
then Joshua called the twelve men whom he had prepared of the
children of Israel out of every tribe a man
and Joshua said unto them pass over before the ark of the
lord your God into the midst of Jordan and take you up every
man of you a stone upon his shoulder according unto the
number of the tribes of the children of Israel
that this may be a sign among you that when your children ask
their fathers in time to come saying what mean ye by these
stones?
then ye shall answer them that the waters of Jordan were cut
off before the ark of the covenant of the lord when it passed
over Jordan the waters of Jordan were cut off and these
stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for
ever.
and the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded and
took up twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan as the lord
spake unto Joshua according to the number of the tribes of
the children of Israel and carried them over with them unto
the place where they lodged and laid them down there.
and Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan in the
place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the
covenant stood and they are there unto this day.
for the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of
Jordan until everything was finished that the lord commanded
Joshua to speak unto the people according to all that Moses
commanded Joshua and the people hasted and passed over.
and it came to pass when all the people were clean passed
over that the ark of the lord passed over and the priests
in the presence of the people.
and the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and half
the tribe of Manasseh passed over armed before the children
of Israel as Moses spake unto them
about forty thousand prepared for war passed over before the
lord unto battle to the plains of Jericho.
on that day the lord magnified Joshua in the sight of all
Israel and they feared him as they feared Moses all the
days of his life.
and the lord spake unto Joshua saying
command the priests that bear the ark of the testimony that
they come up out of Jordan.
Joshua therefore commanded the priests saying come ye up out
of Jordan.
and it came to pass when the priests that bare the ark of the
covenant of the lord were come up out of the midst of Jordan
and the soles of the priests feet were lifted up unto the dry
land that the waters of Jordan returned unto their place and
flowed over all his banks as they did before.
and the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the
first month and encamped in Gilgal in the east border of
Jericho.
and those twelve stones which they took out of Jordan did
Joshua pitch in Gilgal.
and he spake unto the children of Israel saying when your
children shall ask their fathers in time to come saying what
mean these stones?
then ye shall let your children know saying Israel came over
this Jordan on dry land.
for the lord your God dried up the waters of Jordan from
before you until ye were passed over as the lord your God
did to the red sea which he dried up from before us until we
were gone over
that all the people of the earth might know the hand of the
lord that it is Mighty that ye might fear the lord your God
for ever.
and it came to pass when all the kings of the Amorites which
were on the side of Jordan westward and all the kings of the
Canaanites which were by the sea heard that the lord had
dried up the waters of Jordan from before the children of
Israel until we were passed over that their heart melted
Neither was there spirit in them any more because of the
children of Israel.
at that time the lord said unto Joshua make thee Sharp
knives and circumcise again the children of Israel the second
time.
and Joshua made him Sharp knives and circumcised the children
of Israel at the hill of the foreskins.
and this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise all the
people that came out of Egypt that were males even all the
men of war died in the wilderness by the way after they came
out of Egypt.
now all the people that came out were circumcised but all the
people that were born in the wilderness by the way as they
came forth out of Egypt them they had not circumcised.
for the children of Israel walked forty years in the
wilderness till all the people that were men of war which
came out of Egypt were consumed because they obeyed not the
voice of the lord unto whom the lord sware that he would not
shew them the land which the lord sware unto their fathers
that he would give us a land that floweth with milk and
honey.
and their children whom he raised up in their stead them
Joshua circumcised for they were uncircumcised because they
had not circumcised them by the way.
and it came to pass when they had done circumcising all the
people that they abode in their places in the camp till they
were whole.
and the lord said unto Joshua this day have I rolled away the
reproach of Egypt from off you. wherefore the name of the
place is called Gilgal unto this day.
and the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal and kept the
passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the
plains of Jericho.
and they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow
after the passover unleavened cakes and parched corn in the
selfsame day.
and the Manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the
old corn of the land Neither had the children of Israel Manna
any more but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan
that year.
and it came to pass when Joshua was by Jericho that he
lifted up his eyes and looked and behold there stood a man
over against him with his sword drawn in his hand and Joshua
went unto him and said unto him art thou for us or for our
adversaries?
and he said nay but as captain of the host of the lord Am I
now come. and Joshua fell on his face to the earth and did
worship and said unto him what saith my lord unto his
servant?
and the captain of the lord s host said unto Joshua loose thy
shoe from off thy foot for the place whereon thou standest is
holy. and Joshua did so.
now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of
Israel none went out and none came in.
and the lord said unto Joshua see I have given into thine
hand Jericho and the king thereof and the Mighty men of
valour.
and ye shall compass the city all ye men of war and go round
about the city once. thus shalt thou do six days.
and seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of
rams horns and the seventh day ye shall compass the city
seven times and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.
and it shall come to pass that when they make a long blast
with the Ram s horn and when ye hear the sound of the
trumpet all the people shall shout with a great shout and
the wall of the city shall fall down flat and the people
shall ascend up every man straight before him.
and Joshua the son of Nun called the priests and said unto
them take up the ark of the covenant and let seven priests
bear seven trumpets of rams horns before the ark of the lord.
and he said unto the people pass on and compass the city
and let him that is armed pass on before the ark of the lord.
and it came to pass when Joshua had spoken unto the people
that the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams
horns passed on before the lord and blew with the trumpets
and the ark of the covenant of the lord followed them.
and the armed men went before the priests that blew with the
trumpets and the rereward came after the ark the priests
going on and blowing with the trumpets.
and Joshua had commanded the people saying ye shall not
shout nor make any noise with your voice Neither shall any
word proceed out of your mouth until the day I bid you shout
then shall ye shout.
so the ark of the lord compassed the city going about it
once and they came into the camp and lodged in the camp.
and Joshua rose early in the morning and the priests took up
the ark of the lord.
and seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams horns before
the ark of the lord went on continually and blew with the
trumpets and the armed men went before them but the rereward
came after the ark of the lord the priests going on and
blowing with the trumpets.
and the second day they compassed the city once and returned
into the camp so they did six days.
and it came to pass on the seventh day that they rose early
about the dawning of the day and compassed the city after the
same manner seven times only on that day they compassed the
city seven times.
and it came to pass at the seventh time when the priests blew
with the trumpets Joshua said unto the people shout for the
lord hath given you the city.
and the city shall be accursed even it and all that are
therein to the lord only Rahab the harlot shall live she
and all that are with her in the house because she hid the
messengers that we sent.
and ye in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing
lest ye make yourselves accursed when ye take of the accursed
thing and make the camp of Israel a curse and trouble it.
but all the Silver and gold and vessels of brass and Iron
are consecrated unto the lord they shall come into the
treasury of the lord.
so the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets
and it came to pass when the people heard the sound of the
trumpet and the people shouted with a great shout that the
wall fell down flat so that the people went up into the city
every man straight before him and they took the city.
and they utterly destroyed all that was in the city both man
and woman young and old and ox and sheep and ass with the
edge of the sword.
but Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the
country go into the harlot s house and bring out thence the
woman and all that she hath as ye sware unto her.
and the young men that were spies went in and brought out
Rahab and her father and her mother and her brethren and
all that she had and they brought out all her kindred and
left them without the camp of Israel.
and they burnt the city with fire and all that was therein
only the Silver and the gold and the vessels of brass and of
Iron they put into the treasury of the house of the lord.
and Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive and her father s
household and all that she had and she dwelleth in Israel
even unto this day because she hid the messengers which
Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.
and Joshua adjured them at that time saying cursed be the
man before the lord that riseth up and buildeth this city
Jericho he shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn
and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it.
so the lord was with Joshua and his fame was noised
throughout all the country.
but the children of Israel committed a trespass in the
accursed thing for Achan the son of Carmi the son of Zabdi
the son of Zerah of the tribe of Judah took of the accursed
thing and the anger of the lord was kindled against the
children of Israel.
and Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai which is beside
Bethaven on the east of Bethel and spake unto them saying
go up and view the country. and the men went up and viewed Ai.
and they returned to Joshua and said unto him let not all
the people go up but let about two or three thousand men go
up and smite Ai and make not all the people to labour
thither for they are but few.
so there went up thither of the people about three thousand
men and they fled before the men of Ai.
and the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men for
they chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim and
smote them in the going down wherefore the hearts of the
people melted and became as water.
and Joshua rent his clothes and fell to the earth upon his
face before the ark of the lord until the eventide he and the
elders of Israel and put dust upon their heads.
and Joshua said alas O lord God wherefore hast thou at all
brought this people over Jordan to deliver us into the hand
of the Amorites to destroy us? would to God we had been
content and dwelt on the other side Jordan
O lord what shall I say when Israel turneth their backs
before their enemies
for the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land shall
hear of it and shall environ us round and cut off our name
from the earth and what wilt thou do unto thy great name?
and the lord said unto Joshua get thee up wherefore liest
thou thus upon thy face?
Israel hath sinned and they have also transgressed my
covenant which I commanded them for they have even taken of
the accursed thing and have also stolen and dissembled also
and they have put it even among their own stuff.
therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their
enemies but turned their backs before their enemies because
they were accursed Neither will I be with you any more
except ye destroy the accursed from among you.
up sanctify the people and say sanctify yourselves against
to morrow for thus saith the lord God of Israel there is an
accursed thing in the midst of thee O Israel thou canst not
stand before thine enemies until ye take away the accursed
thing from among you.
in the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your
tribes and it shall be that the tribe which the lord taketh
shall come according to the families thereof and the family
which the lord shall take shall come by households and the
household which the lord shall take shall come man by man.
and it shall be that he that is taken with the accursed thing
shall be burnt with fire he and all that he hath because he
hath transgressed the covenant of the lord and because he
hath wrought folly in Israel.
so Joshua rose up early in the morning and brought Israel by
their tribes and the tribe of Judah was taken
and he brought the family of Judah and he took the family of
the Zarhites and he brought the family of the Zarhites man by
man and Zabdi was taken
and he brought his household man by man and Achan the son of
Carmi the son of Zabdi the son of Zerah of the tribe of
Judah was taken.
and Joshua said unto Achan my son give I pray thee glory
to the lord God of Israel and make confession unto him and
tell me now what thou hast done hide it not from me.
and Achan answered Joshua and said indeed I have sinned
against the lord God of Israel and thus and thus have I done
when I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment and
two hundred shekels of Silver and a wedge of gold of fifty
shekels weight then I coveted them and took them and
behold they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent and
the Silver under it.
so Joshua sent messengers and they ran unto the tent and
behold it was hid in his tent and the Silver under it.
and they took them out of the midst of the tent and brought
them unto Joshua and unto all the children of Israel and
laid them out before the lord.
and Joshua and all Israel with him took Achan the son of
Zerah and the Silver and the garment and the wedge of gold
and his sons and his daughters and his oxen and his asses
and his sheep and his tent and all that he had and they
brought them unto the valley of Achor.
and Joshua said why hast thou troubled us? the lord shall
trouble thee this day. and all Israel stoned him with stones
and burned them with fire after they had stoned them with
stones.
and they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day.
so the lord turned from the fierceness of his anger. wherefore
the name of that place was called the valley of Achor unto
this day.
and the lord said unto Joshua fear not Neither be thou
dismayed take all the people of war with thee and Arise go
up to Ai see I have given into thy hand the king of Ai and
his people and his city and his land
and thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst unto
Jericho and her king only the spoil thereof and the cattle
thereof shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves lay thee an
ambush for the city behind it.
so Joshua arose and all the people of war to go up against
Ai and Joshua chose out thirty thousand Mighty men of valour
and sent them away by night.
and he commanded them saying behold ye shall lie in wait
against the city even behind the city go not very far from
the city but be ye all ready
and I and all the people that are with me will approach unto
the city and it shall come to pass when they come out
against us as at the first that we will flee before them
 for they will come out after us till we have drawn them from
the city for they will say they flee before us as at the
first therefore we will flee before them.
then ye shall rise up from the ambush and seize upon the
city for the lord your God will deliver it into your hand.
and it shall be when ye have taken the city that ye shall
set the city on fire according to the commandment of the lord
shall ye do. see I have commanded you.
Joshua therefore sent them forth and they went to lie in
ambush and abode between Bethel and Ai on the west side of
Ai but Joshua lodged that night among the people.
and Joshua rose up early in the morning and numbered the
people and went up he and the elders of Israel before the
people to Ai.
and all the people even the people of war that were with him
went up and drew nigh and came before the city and pitched
on the north side of Ai now there was a valley between them
and Ai.
and he took about five thousand men and set them to lie in
ambush between Bethel and Ai on the west side of the city.
and when they had set the people even all the host that was
on the north of the city and their liers in wait on the west
of the city Joshua went that night into the midst of the
valley.
and it came to pass when the king of Ai saw it that they
hasted and rose up early and the men of the city went out
against Israel to battle he and all his people at a time
appointed before the plain but he wist not that there were
liers in ambush against him behind the city.
and Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before
them and fled by the way of the wilderness.
and all the people that were in Ai were called together to
pursue after them and they pursued after Joshua and were
drawn away from the city.
and there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel that went not
out after Israel and they left the city open and pursued
after Israel.
and the lord said unto Joshua stretch out the spear that is
in thy hand toward Ai for I will give it into thine hand. and
Joshua stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward
the city.
and the ambush arose quickly out of their place and they ran
as soon as he had stretched out his hand and they entered
into the city and took it and hasted and set the city on
fire.
and when the men of Ai looked behind them they saw and
behold the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven and they
had no power to flee this way or that way and the people that
fled to the wilderness turned back upon the pursuers.
and when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken
the city and that the smoke of the city ascended then they
turned again and slew the men of Ai.
and the other issued out of the city against them so they
were in the midst of Israel some on this side and some on
that side and they smote them so that they let none of them
remain or escape.
and the king of Ai they took alive and brought him to Joshua.
and it came to pass when Israel had made an end of slaying
all the inhabitants of Ai in the field in the wilderness
wherein they chased them and when they were all fallen on the
edge of the sword until they were consumed that all the
Israelites returned unto Ai and smote it with the edge of the
sword.
and so it was that all that fell that day both of men and
women were twelve thousand even all the men of Ai.
for Joshua drew not his hand back wherewith he stretched out
the spear until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants
of Ai.
only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for a
prey unto themselves according unto the word of the lord
which he commanded Joshua.
and Joshua burnt Ai and made it an heap for ever even a
desolation unto this day.
and the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide and as
soon as the sun was down Joshua commanded that they should
take his carcase down from the tree and cast it at the
entering of the gate of the city and raise thereon a great
heap of stones that remaineth unto this day.
then Joshua built an altar unto the lord God of Israel in
mount ebal
as Moses the servant of the lord commanded the children of
Israel as it is written in the book of the law of Moses an
altar of whole stones over which no man hath lift up any
Iron and they offered thereon burnt offerings unto the lord
and sacrificed peace offerings.
and he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses
which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel.
and all Israel and their elders and officers and their
judges stood on this side the ark and on that side before the
priests the Levites which bare the ark of the covenant of the
lord as well the stranger as he that was born among them
half of them over against mount Gerizim and half of them over
against mount ebal as Moses the servant of the lord had
commanded before that they should bless the people of Israel.
and afterward he read all the words of the law the blessings
and cursings according to all that is written in the book of
the law.
there was not a word of all that Moses commanded which Joshua
read not before all the congregation of Israel with the
women and the little ones and the strangers that were
conversant among them.
and it came to pass when all the kings which were on this
side Jordan in the hills and in the valleys and in all the
coasts of the great sea over against Lebanon the Hittite and
the Amorite the Canaanite the Perizzite the Hivite and the
Jebusite heard thereof
that they gathered themselves together to fight with Joshua
and with Israel with one accord.
and when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done
unto Jericho and to Ai
they did work wilily and went and made as if they had been
ambassadors and took old sacks upon their asses and wine
bottles old and rent and bound up
and old shoes and clouted upon their feet and old garments
upon them and all the bread of their provision was dry and
mouldy.
and they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal and said unto
him and to the men of Israel we be come from a far country
now therefore make ye a league with us.
and the men of Israel said unto the Hivites peradventure ye
dwell among us and how shall we make a league with you?
and they said unto Joshua we are thy servants. and Joshua
said unto them who are ye? and from whence come ye?
and they said unto him from a very far country thy servants
are come because of the name of the lord thy God for we have
heard the fame of him and all that he did in Egypt
and all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites that
were beyond Jordan to Sihon king of Heshbon and to Og king
of Bashan which was at Ashtaroth.
wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country
spake to us saying take victuals with you for the journey
and go to meet them and say unto them we are your servants
therefore now make ye a league with us.
this our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses
on the day we came forth to go unto you but now behold it
is dry and it is mouldy
and these bottles of wine which we filled were new and
behold they be rent and these our garments and our shoes are
become old by reason of the very long journey.
and the men took of their victuals and asked not counsel at
the mouth of the lord.
and Joshua made peace with them and made a league with them
to let them live and the princes of the congregation sware
unto them.
and it came to pass at the end of three days after they had
made a league with them that they heard that they were their
neighbours and that they dwelt among them.
and the children of Israel journeyed and came unto their
cities on the third day. now their cities were Gibeon and
Chephirah and Beeroth and Kirjathjearim.
and the children of Israel smote them not because the princes
of the congregation had sworn unto them by the lord God of
Israel. and all the congregation murmured against the princes.
but all the princes said unto all the congregation we have
sworn unto them by the lord God of Israel now therefore we
may not touch them.
this we will do to them we will even let them live lest
wrath be upon us because of the oath which we sware unto
them.
and the princes said unto them let them live but let them be
hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation
as the princes had promised them.
and Joshua called for them and he spake unto them saying
wherefore have ye beguiled us saying we are very far from
you when ye dwell among us?
now therefore ye are cursed and there shall none of you be
freed from being bondmen and hewers of wood and drawers of
water for the house of my God.
and they answered Joshua and said because it was certainly
told thy servants how that the lord thy God commanded his
servant Moses to give you all the land and to destroy all the
inhabitants of the land from before you therefore we were
sore afraid of our lives because of you and have done this
thing.
and now behold we are in thine hand as it seemeth good and
right unto thee to do unto us do.
and so did he unto them and delivered them out of the hand of
the children of Israel that they slew them not.
and Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of
water for the congregation and for the altar of the lord
even unto this day in the place which he should choose.
now it came to pass when Adonizedec king of Jerusalem had
heard how Joshua had taken Ai and had utterly destroyed it
as he had done to Jericho and her king so he had done to Ai
and her king and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace
with Israel and were among them
that they feared greatly because Gibeon was a great city as
one of the royal cities and because it was greater than Ai
and all the men thereof were Mighty.
wherefore Adonizedec king of Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king
of Hebron and unto Piram king of Jarmuth and unto Japhia
king of Lachish and unto Debir king of Eglon saying
come up unto me and help me that we may smite Gibeon for it
hath made peace with Joshua and with the children of Israel.
therefore the five kings of the Amorites the king of
Jerusalem the king of Hebron the king of Jarmuth the king
of Lachish the king of Eglon gathered themselves together
and went up they and all their hosts and encamped before
Gibeon and made war against it.
and the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal
saying slack not thy hand from thy servants come up to us
quickly and save us and help us for all the kings of the
Amorites that dwell in the mountains are gathered together
against us.
so Joshua ascended from Gilgal he and all the people of war
with him and all the Mighty men of valour.
and the lord said unto Joshua fear them not for I have
delivered them into thine hand there shall not a man of them
stand before thee.
Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly and went up from
Gilgal all night.
and the lord discomfited them before Israel and slew them
with a great slaughter at Gibeon and chased them along the
way that goeth up to Bethhoron and smote them to Azekah and
unto Makkedah.
and it came to pass as they fled from before Israel and were
in the going down to Bethhoron that the lord cast down great
stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah and they died they
were more which died with hailstones than they whom the
children of Israel slew with the sword.
then spake Joshua to the lord in the day when the lord
delivered up the Amorites before the children of Israel and
he said in the sight of Israel sun stand thou still upon
Gibeon and thou moon in the valley of Ajalon.
and the sun stood still and the moon stayed until the people
had avenged themselves upon their enemies. is not this written
in the book of Jasher? so the sun stood still in the midst of
heaven and hasted not to go down about a whole day.
and there was no day like that before it or after it that the
lord hearkened unto the voice of a man for the lord fought
for Israel.
and Joshua returned and all Israel with him unto the camp to
Gilgal.
but these five kings fled and hid themselves in a cave at
Makkedah.
and it was told Joshua saying the five kings are found hid
in a cave at Makkedah.
and Joshua said roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave
and set men by it for to keep them
and stay ye not but pursue after your enemies and smite the
hindmost of them suffer them not to enter into their cities
for the lord your God hath delivered them into your hand.
and it came to pass when Joshua and the children of Israel
had made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter
till they were consumed that the rest which remained of them
entered into fenced cities.
and all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah
in peace none moved his tongue against any of the children of
Israel.
then said Joshua open the mouth of the cave and bring out
those five kings unto me out of the cave.
and they did so and brought forth those five kings unto him
out of the cave the king of Jerusalem the king of Hebron
the king of Jarmuth the king of Lachish and the king of
Eglon.
and it came to pass when they brought out those kings unto
Joshua that Joshua called for all the men of Israel and said
unto the captains of the men of war which went with him come
near put your feet upon the necks of these kings. and they
came near and put their feet upon the necks of them.
and Joshua said unto them fear not nor be dismayed be
strong and of good courage for thus shall the lord do to all
your enemies against whom ye fight.
and afterward Joshua smote them and slew them and hanged
them on five trees and they were hanging upon the trees until
the evening.
and it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun
that Joshua commanded and they took them down off the trees
and cast them into the cave wherein they had been hid and
laid great stones in the cave s mouth which remain until this
very day.
and that day Joshua took Makkedah and smote it with the edge
of the sword and the king thereof he utterly destroyed them
and all the souls that were therein he let none remain and
he did to the king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of
Jericho.
then Joshua passed from Makkedah and all Israel with him
unto Libnah and fought against Libnah
and the lord delivered it also and the king thereof into the
hand of Israel and he smote it with the edge of the sword
and all the souls that were therein he let none remain in it
but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of
Jericho.
and Joshua passed from Libnah and all Israel with him unto
Lachish and encamped against it and fought against it
and the lord delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel which
took it on the second day and smote it with the edge of the
sword and all the souls that were therein according to all
that he had done to Libnah.
then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish and Joshua
smote him and his people until he had left him none
remaining.
and from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon and all Israel with
him and they encamped against it and fought against it
and they took it on that day and smote it with the edge of
the sword and all the souls that were therein he utterly
destroyed that day according to all that he had done to
Lachish.
and Joshua went up from Eglon and all Israel with him unto
Hebron and they fought against it
and they took it and smote it with the edge of the sword and
the king thereof and all the cities thereof and all the
souls that were therein he left none remaining according to
all that he had done to Eglon but destroyed it utterly and
all the souls that were therein.
and Joshua returned and all Israel with him to Debir and
fought against it
and he took it and the king thereof and all the cities
thereof and they smote them with the edge of the sword and
utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein he left
none remaining as he had done to Hebron so he did to Debir
and to the king thereof as he had done also to Libnah and to
her king.
so Joshua smote all the country of the hills and of the
south and of the vale and of the springs and all their
kings he left none remaining but utterly destroyed all that
breathed as the lord God of Israel commanded.
and Joshua smote them from Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza and
all the country of Goshen even unto Gibeon.
and all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one
time because the lord God of Israel fought for Israel.
and Joshua returned and all Israel with him unto the camp to
Gilgal.
and it came to pass when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those
things that he sent to Jobab king of Madon and to the king
of Shimron and to the king of Achshaph
and to the kings that were on the north of the mountains and
of the plains south of Chinneroth and in the valley and in
the borders of Dor on the west
and to the Canaanite on the east and on the west and to the
Amorite and the Hittite and the Perizzite and the Jebusite
in the mountains and to the Hivite under Hermon in the land
of Mizpeh.
and they went out they and all their hosts with them Much
people even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in
multitude with horses and chariots very many.
and when all these kings were met together they came and
pitched together at the waters of Merom to fight against
Israel.
and the lord said unto Joshua be not afraid because of them
for to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain
before Israel thou shalt hough their horses and burn their
chariots with fire.
so Joshua came and all the people of war with him against
them by the waters of Merom suddenly and they fell upon them.
and the lord delivered them into the hand of Israel who smote
them and chased them unto great Zidon and unto
Misrephothmaim and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward and
they smote them until they left them none remaining.
and Joshua did unto them as the lord bade him he houghed
their horses and burnt their chariots with fire.
and Joshua at that time turned back and took Hazor and smote
the king thereof with the sword for Hazor beforetime was the
head of all those kingdoms.
and they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge
of the sword utterly destroying them there was not any left
to breathe and he burnt Hazor with fire.
and all the cities of those kings and all the kings of them
did Joshua take and smote them with the edge of the sword
and he utterly destroyed them as Moses the servant of the
lord commanded.
but as for the cities that stood still in their strength
Israel burned none of them save Hazor only that did Joshua
burn.
and all the spoil of these cities and the cattle the
children of Israel took for a prey unto themselves but every
man they smote with the edge of the sword until they had
destroyed them Neither left they any to breathe.
as the lord commanded Moses his servant so did Moses command
Joshua and so did Joshua he left nothing undone of all that
the lord commanded Moses.
so Joshua took all that land the hills and all the south
country and all the land of Goshen and the valley and the
plain and the mountain of Israel and the valley of the same
even from the mount Halak that goeth up to Seir even unto
Baalgad in the valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon and all
their kings he took and smote them and slew them.
Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.
there was not a city that made peace with the children of
Israel save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon all other
they took in battle.
for it was of the lord to harden their hearts that they
should come against Israel in battle that he might destroy
them utterly and that they might have no favour but that he
might destroy them as the lord commanded Moses.
and at that time came Joshua and cut off the Anakims from the
mountains from Hebron from Debir from Anab and from all
the mountains of Judah and from all the mountains of Israel
Joshua destroyed them utterly with their cities.
there was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children
of Israel only in Gaza in Gath and in Ashdod there
remained.
so Joshua took the whole land according to all that the lord
said unto Moses and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto
Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. and the
land rested from war.
now these are the kings of the land which the children of
Israel smote and possessed their land on the other side
Jordan toward the rising of the sun from the river Arnon unto
mount Hermon and all the plain on the east
Sihon king of the Amorites who dwelt in Heshbon and ruled
from Aroer which is upon the bank of the river Arnon and
from the middle of the river and from half Gilead even unto
the river Jabbok which is the border of the children of
Ammon
and from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east and
unto the sea of the plain even the salt sea on the east the
way to Bethjeshimoth and from the south under Ashdothpisgah
and the coast of Og king of Bashan which was of the remnant
of the giants that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei
and reigned in mount Hermon and in Salcah and in all Bashan
unto the border of the Geshurites and the Maachathites and
half Gilead the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.
them did Moses the servant of the lord and the children of
Israel smite and Moses the servant of the lord gave it for a
possession unto the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half
tribe of Manasseh.
and these are the kings of the country which Joshua and the
children of Israel smote on this side Jordan on the west from
Baalgad in the valley of Lebanon even unto the mount Halak
that goeth up to Seir which Joshua gave unto the tribes of
Israel for a possession according to their divisions
in the mountains and in the valleys and in the plains and
in the springs and in the wilderness and in the south
country the Hittites the Amorites and the Canaanites the
Perizzites the Hivites and the Jebusites
the king of Jericho one the king of Ai which is beside
Bethel one
the king of Jerusalem one the king of Hebron one
the king of Jarmuth one the king of Lachish one
the king of Eglon one the king of Gezer one
the king of Debir one the king of Geder one
the king of Hormah one the king of Arad one
the king of Libnah one the king of Adullam one
the king of Makkedah one the king of Bethel one
the king of Tappuah one the king of Hepher one
the king of Aphek one the king of Lasharon one
the king of Madon one the king of Hazor one
the king of Shimronmeron one the king of Achshaph one
the king of Taanach one the king of Megiddo one
the king of Kedesh one the king of Jokneam of Carmel one
the king of Dor in the coast of Dor one the king of the
nations of Gilgal one
the king of Tirzah one all the kings thirty and one.
now Joshua was old and stricken in years and the lord said
unto him thou art old and stricken in years and there
remaineth yet very Much land to be possessed.
this is the land that yet remaineth all the borders of the
Philistines and all Geshuri
from Sihor which is before Egypt even unto the borders of
Ekron northward which is counted to the Canaanite five lords
of the Philistines the Gazathites and the Ashdothites the
Eshkalonites the Gittites and the Ekronites also the
Avites
from the south all the land of the Canaanites and Mearah
that is beside the Sidonians unto Aphek to the borders of the
Amorites
and the land of the Giblites and all Lebanon toward the
sunrising from Baalgad under mount Hermon unto the entering
into Hamath.
all the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto
Misrephothmaim and all the Sidonians them will I drive out
from before the children of Israel only divide thou it by Lot
unto the Israelites for an inheritance as I have commanded
thee.
now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the
nine tribes and the half tribe of Manasseh
with whom the Reubenites and the Gadites have received their
inheritance which Moses gave them beyond Jordan eastward
even as Moses the servant of the lord gave them
from Aroer that is upon the bank of the river Arnon and the
city that is in the midst of the river and all the plain of
Medeba unto Dibon
and all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites which
reigned in Heshbon unto the border of the children of Ammon
and Gilead and the border of the Geshurites and Maachathites
and all mount Hermon and all Bashan unto Salcah
all the kingdom of Og in Bashan which reigned in Ashtaroth
and in Edrei who remained of the remnant of the giants for
these did Moses smite and cast them out.
nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the
Geshurites nor the Maachathites but the Geshurites and the
Maachathites dwell among the Israelites until this day.
only unto the tribes of Levi he gave none inheritance the
sacrifices of the lord God of Israel made by fire are their
inheritance as he said unto them.
and Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben
inheritance according to their families.
and their coast was from Aroer that is on the bank of the
river Arnon and the city that is in the midst of the river
and all the plain by Medeba
Heshbon and all her cities that are in the plain Dibon and
Bamothbaal and Bethbaalmeon
and Jahaza and Kedemoth and Mephaath
and Kirjathaim and Sibmah and Zarethshahar in the mount of
the valley
and Bethpeor and Ashdothpisgah and Bethjeshimoth
and all the cities of the plain and all the kingdom of Sihon
king of the Amorites which reigned in Heshbon whom Moses
smote with the princes of Midian Evi and Rekem and Zur and
Hur and Reba which were dukes of Sihon dwelling in the
country.
Balaam also the son of Beor the soothsayer did the children
of Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by
them.
and the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan and the
border thereof. this was the inheritance of the children of
Reuben after their families the cities and the villages
thereof.
and Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad even unto
the children of Gad according to their families.
and their coast was Jazer and all the cities of Gilead and
half the land of the children of Ammon unto Aroer that is
before Rabbah
and from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh and Betonim and from
Mahanaim unto the border of Debir
and in the valley Betharam and Bethnimrah and Succoth and
Zaphon the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon
Jordan and his border even unto the edge of the sea of
Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.
this is the inheritance of the children of Gad after their
families the cities and their villages.
and Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh
and this was the possession of the half tribe of the children
of Manasseh by their families.
and their coast was from Mahanaim all Bashan all the kingdom
of Og king of Bashan and all the towns of Jair which are in
Bashan threescore cities
and half Gilead and Ashtaroth and Edrei cities of the
kingdom of Og in Bashan were pertaining unto the children of
Machir the son of Manasseh even to the one half of the
children of Machir by their families.
these are the countries which Moses did distribute for
inheritance in the plains of Moab on the other side Jordan
by Jericho eastward.
but unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance the
lord God of Israel was their inheritance as he said unto
them.
and these are the countries which the children of Israel
inherited in the land of Canaan which Eleazar the priest and
Joshua the son of Nun and the heads of the fathers of the
tribes of the children of Israel distributed for inheritance
to them.
by Lot was their inheritance as the lord commanded by the
hand of Moses for the nine tribes and for the half tribe.
for Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half
tribe on the other side Jordan but unto the Levites he gave
none inheritance among them.
for the children of Joseph were two tribes Manasseh and
Ephraim therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in the
land save cities to dwell in with their suburbs for their
cattle and for their substance.
as the lord commanded Moses so the children of Israel did
and they divided the land.
then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal and
Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite said unto him thou
knowest the thing that the lord said unto Moses the man of God
concerning me and thee in Kadeshbarnea.
forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the lord sent
me from Kadeshbarnea to espy out the land and I brought him
word again as it was in mine heart.
nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart
of the people melt but I wholly followed the lord my God.
and Moses sware on that day saying surely the land whereon
thy feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance and thy
children s for ever because thou hast wholly followed the
lord my God.
and now behold the lord hath kept me alive as he said
these forty and five years even since the lord spake this
word unto Moses while the children of Israel wandered in the
wilderness and now lo I Am this day fourscore and five
years old.
as yet I Am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses
sent me as my strength was then even so is my strength now
for war both to go out and to come in.
now therefore give me this mountain whereof the lord spake in
that day for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims were
there and that the cities were great and fenced if so be the
lord will be with me then I shall be able to drive them out
as the lord said.
and Joshua blessed him and gave unto Caleb the son of
Jephunneh Hebron for an inheritance.
Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of
Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day because that he wholly
followed the lord God of Israel.
and the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba which Arba was
a great man among the Anakims. and the land had rest from war.
this then was the Lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by
their families even to the border of Edom the wilderness of
Zin southward was the uttermost part of the south coast.
and their south border was from the shore of the salt sea
from the bay that looketh southward
and it went out to the south side to Maalehacrabbim and
passed along to Zin and ascended up on the south side unto
Kadeshbarnea and passed along to Hezron and went up to Adar
and fetched a compass to Karkaa
from thence it passed toward Azmon and went out unto the
river of Egypt and the goings out of that coast were at the
sea this shall be your south coast.
and the east border was the salt sea even unto the end of
Jordan. and their border in the north quarter was from the bay
of the sea at the uttermost part of Jordan
and the border went up to Bethhogla and passed along by the
north of Betharabah and the border went up to the stone of
Bohan the son of Reuben
and the border went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor
and so northward looking toward Gilgal that is before the
going up to Adummim which is on the south side of the river
and the border passed toward the waters of Enshemesh and the
goings out thereof were at Enrogel
and the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto
the south side of the Jebusite the same is Jerusalem and the
border went up to the top of the mountain that lieth before
the valley of Hinnom westward which is at the end of the
valley of the giants northward
and the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the
fountain of the water of Nephtoah and went out to the cities
of mount Ephron and the border was drawn to Baalah which is
Kirjathjearim
and the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir
and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim which is
Chesalon on the north side and went down to Bethshemesh and
passed on to Timnah
and the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward and
the border was drawn to Shicron and passed along to mount
Baalah and went out unto Jabneel and the goings out of the
border were at the sea.
and the west border was to the great sea and the coast
thereof. this is the coast of the children of Judah round
about according to their families.
and unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the
children of Judah according to the commandment of the lord to
Joshua even the city of Arba the father of Anak which city
is Hebron.
and Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak Sheshai and
Ahiman and Talmai the children of Anak.
and he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir and the
name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher.
and Caleb said he that smiteth Kirjathsepher and taketh it
to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.
and Othniel the son of Kenaz the brother of Caleb took it
and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
and it came to pass as she came unto him that she moved him
to ask of her father a field and she lighted off her ass and
Caleb said unto her what wouldest thou?
who answered give me a blessing for thou hast given me a
south land give me also springs of water. and he gave her the
upper springs and the nether springs.
this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah
according to their families.
and the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah
toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzeel and Eder and
Jagur
and Kinah and Dimonah and Adadah
and Kedesh and Hazor and Ithnan
Ziph and Telem and Bealoth
and Hazor Hadattah and Kerioth and Hezron which is Hazor
Amam and Shema and Moladah
and Hazargaddah and Heshmon and Bethpalet
and Hazarshual and Beersheba and Bizjothjah
Baalah and Iim and Azem
and Eltolad and Chesil and Hormah
and Ziklag and Madmannah and Sansannah
and Lebaoth and Shilhim and Ain and Rimmon all the cities
are twenty and nine with their villages
and in the valley Eshtaol and Zoreah and Ashnah
and Zanoah and Engannim Tappuah and Enam
Jarmuth and Adullam Socoh and Azekah
and Sharaim and Adithaim and Gederah and Gederothaim
fourteen cities with their villages
Zenan and Hadashah and Migdalgad
and Dilean and Mizpeh and Joktheel
Lachish and Bozkath and Eglon
and Cabbon and Lahmam and Kithlish
and Gederoth Bethdagon and Naamah and Makkedah sixteen
cities with their villages
Libnah and Ether and Ashan
and Jiphtah and Ashnah and Nezib
and Keilah and Achzib and Mareshah nine cities with their
villages
Ekron with her towns and her villages
from Ekron even unto the sea all that lay near Ashdod with
their villages
Ashdod with her towns and her villages Gaza with her towns
and her villages unto the river of Egypt and the great sea
and the border thereof
and in the mountains Shamir and Jattir and Socoh
and Dannah and Kirjathsannah which is Debir
and Anab and Eshtemoh and Anim
and Goshen and Holon and Giloh eleven cities with their
villages
Arab and Dumah and Eshean
and Janum and Bethtappuah and Aphekah
and Humtah and Kirjatharba which is Hebron and Zior nine
cities with their villages
Maon Carmel and Ziph and Juttah
and Jezreel and Jokdeam and Zanoah
Cain Gibeah and Timnah Ten cities with their villages
Halhul Bethzur and Gedor
and Maarath and Bethanoth and Eltekon six cities with their
villages
Kirjathbaal which is Kirjathjearim and Rabbah two cities
with their villages
in the wilderness Betharabah Middin and Secacah
and Nibshan and the city of salt and Engedi six cities with
their villages.
as for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem the
children of Judah could not drive them out but the Jebusites
dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.
and the Lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by
Jericho unto the water of Jericho on the east to the
wilderness that goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Bethel
and goeth out from Bethel to Luz and passeth along unto the
borders of Archi to Ataroth
and goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti unto the
coast of Bethhoron the nether and to Gezer and the goings
out thereof are at the sea.
so the children of Joseph Manasseh and Ephraim took their
inheritance.
and the border of the children of Ephraim according to their
families was thus even the border of their inheritance on the
east side was Atarothaddar unto Bethhoron the upper
and the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the
north side and the border went about eastward unto
Taanathshiloh and passed by it on the east to Janohah
and it went down from Janohah to Ataroth and to Naarath and
came to Jericho and went out at Jordan.
the border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river
Kanah and the goings out thereof were at the sea. this is the
inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephraim by their
families.
and the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among
the inheritance of the children of Manasseh all the cities
with their villages.
and they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer but
the Canaanites dwell among the Ephraimites unto this day and
serve under tribute.
there was also a Lot for the tribe of Manasseh for he was the
firstborn of Joseph to wit for Machir the firstborn of
Manasseh the father of Gilead because he was a man of war
therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.
there was also a Lot for the rest of the children of Manasseh
by their families for the children of Abiezer and for the
children of Helek and for the children of Asriel and for the
children of Shechem and for the children of Hepher and for
the children of Shemida these were the Male children of
Manasseh the son of Joseph by their families.
but Zelophehad the son of Hepher the son of Gilead the son
of Machir the son of Manasseh had no sons but daughters
and these are the names of his daughters Mahlah and Noah
Hoglah Milcah and Tirzah.
and they came near before Eleazar the priest and before
Joshua the son of Nun and before the princes saying the
lord commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our
brethren. therefore according to the commandment of the lord
he gave them an inheritance among the brethren of their
father.
and there fell Ten portions to Manasseh beside the land of
Gilead and Bashan which were on the other side Jordan
because the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his
sons and the rest of Manasseh s sons had the land of Gilead.
and the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah that
lieth before Shechem and the border went along on the right
hand unto the inhabitants of Entappuah.
now Manasseh had the land of Tappuah but Tappuah on the
border of Manasseh belonged to the children of Ephraim
and the coast descended unto the river Kanah southward of the
river these cities of Ephraim are among the cities of
Manasseh the coast of Manasseh also was on the north side of
the river and the outgoings of it were at the sea
southward it was Ephraim s and northward it was Manasseh s
and the sea is his border and they met together in Asher on
the north and in Issachar on the east.
and Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Bethshean and her
towns and Ibleam and her towns and the inhabitants of Dor
and her towns and the inhabitants of Endor and her towns and
the inhabitants of Taanach and her towns and the inhabitants
of Megiddo and her towns even three countries.
yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the
inhabitants of those cities but the Canaanites would dwell in
that land.
yet it came to pass when the children of Israel were waxen
strong that they put the Canaanites to tribute but did not
utterly drive them out.
and the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua saying why hast
thou given me but one Lot and one portion to inherit seeing I
Am a great people forasmuch as the lord hath blessed me
hitherto?
and Joshua answered them if thou be a great people then get
thee up to the wood country and cut down for thyself there in
the land of the Perizzites and of the giants if mount Ephraim
be too narrow for thee.
and the children of Joseph said the hill is not enough for
us and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the
valley have chariots of Iron both they who are of Bethshean
and her towns and they who are of the valley of Jezreel.
and Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph even to Ephraim and
to Manasseh saying thou art a great people and hast great
power thou shalt not have one Lot only
but the mountain shall be thine for it is a wood and thou
shalt cut it down and the outgoings of it shall be thine for
thou shalt drive out the Canaanites though they have Iron
chariots and though they be strong.
and the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled
together at Shiloh and set up the tabernacle of the
congregation there. and the land was subdued before them.
and there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes
which had not yet received their inheritance.
and Joshua said unto the children of Israel how long are ye
slack to go to possess the land which the lord God of your
fathers hath given you?
give out from among you three men for each tribe and I will
send them and they shall rise and go through the land and
describe it according to the inheritance of them and they
shall come again to me.
and they shall divide it into seven parts Judah shall abide
in their coast on the south and the house of Joseph shall
abide in their coasts on the north.
ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts and
bring the description hither to me that I may cast lots for
you here before the lord our God.
but the Levites have no part among you for the priesthood of
the lord is their inheritance and Gad and Reuben and half
the tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance beyond
Jordan on the east which Moses the servant of the lord gave
them.
and the men arose and went away and Joshua charged them that
went to describe the land saying go and walk through the
land and describe it and come again to me that I may here
cast lots for you before the lord in Shiloh.
and the men went and passed through the land and described it
by cities into seven parts in a book and came again to Joshua
to the host at Shiloh.
and Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the lord and
there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel
according to their divisions.
and the Lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up
according to their families and the coast of their Lot came
forth between the children of Judah and the children of
Joseph.
and their border on the north side was from Jordan and the
border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side and
went up through the mountains westward and the goings out
thereof were at the wilderness of Bethaven.
and the border went over from thence toward Luz to the side
of Luz which is Bethel southward and the border descended
to Atarothadar near the hill that lieth on the south side of
the nether Bethhoron.
and the border was drawn thence and compassed the corner of
the sea southward from the hill that lieth before Bethhoron
southward and the goings out thereof were at Kirjathbaal
which is Kirjathjearim a city of the children of Judah this
was the west quarter.
and the south quarter was from the end of Kirjathjearim and
the border went out on the west and went out to the well of
waters of Nephtoah
and the border came down to the end of the mountain that lieth
before the valley of the son of Hinnom and which is in the
valley of the giants on the north and descended to the valley
of Hinnom to the side of Jebusi on the south and descended
to Enrogel
and was drawn from the north and went forth to Enshemesh and
went forth toward Geliloth which is over against the going up
of Adummim and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of
Reuben
and passed along toward the side over against Arabah
northward and went down unto Arabah
and the border passed along to the side of Bethhoglah
northward and the outgoings of the border were at the north
bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan this was the
south coast.
and Jordan was the border of it on the east side. this was the
inheritance of the children of Benjamin by the coasts thereof
round about according to their families.
now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin
according to their families were Jericho and Bethhoglah and
the valley of Keziz
and Betharabah and Zemaraim and Bethel
and Avim and Pharah and Ophrah
and Chepharhaammonai and Ophni and Gaba twelve cities with
their villages
Gibeon and Ramah and Beeroth
and Mizpeh and Chephirah and Mozah
and Rekem and Irpeel and Taralah
and Zelah Eleph and Jebusi which is Jerusalem Gibeath and
Kirjath fourteen cities with their villages. this is the
inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their
families.
and the second Lot came forth to Simeon even for the tribe of
the children of Simeon according to their families and their
inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of
Judah.
and they had in their inheritance Beersheba and Sheba and
Moladah
and Hazarshual and Balah and Azem
and Eltolad and Bethul and Hormah
and Ziklag and Bethmarcaboth and Hazarsusah
and Bethlebaoth and Sharuhen thirteen cities and their
villages
Ain Remmon and Ether and Ashan four cities and their
villages
and all the villages that were round about these cities to
Baalathbeer Ramath of the south. this is the inheritance of
the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their
families.
out of the portion of the children of Judah was the
inheritance of the children of Simeon for the part of the
children of Judah was too Much for them therefore the
children of Simeon had their inheritance within the
inheritance of them.
and the third Lot came up for the children of Zebulun
according to their families and the border of their
inheritance was unto Sarid
and their border went up toward the sea and Maralah and
reached to Dabbasheth and reached to the river that is before
Jokneam
and turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the
border of Chislothtabor and then goeth out to Daberath and
goeth up to Japhia
and from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittahhepher
to Ittahkazin and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to Neah
and the border compasseth it on the north side to Hannathon
and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthahel
and Kattath and Nahallal and Shimron and Idalah and
Bethlehem twelve cities with their villages.
this is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according
to their families these cities with their villages.
and the fourth Lot came out to Issachar for the children of
Issachar according to their families.
and their border was toward Jezreel and Chesulloth and
Shunem
and Haphraim and Shihon and Anaharath
and Rabbith and Kishion and Abez
and Remeth and Engannim and Enhaddah and Bethpazzez
and the coast reacheth to Tabor and Shahazimah and
Bethshemesh and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan
sixteen cities with their villages.
this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of
Issachar according to their families the cities and their
villages.
and the fifth Lot came out for the tribe of the children of
Asher according to their families.
and their border was Helkath and Hali and Beten and
Achshaph
and Alammelech and Amad and Misheal and reacheth to Carmel
westward and to Shihorlibnath
and turneth toward the sunrising to Bethdagon and reacheth to
Zebulun and to the valley of Jiphthahel toward the north side
of Bethemek and Neiel and goeth out to Cabul on the left
hand
and Hebron and Rehob and Hammon and Kanah even unto great
Zidon
and then the coast turneth to Ramah and to the strong city
Tyre and the coast turneth to Hosah and the outgoings
thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib
Ummah also and Aphek and Rehob twenty and two cities with
their villages.
this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher
according to their families these cities with their villages.
the sixth Lot came out to the children of Naphtali even for
the children of Naphtali according to their families.
and their coast was from Heleph from Allon to Zaanannim and
Adami Nekeb and Jabneel unto Lakum and the outgoings
thereof were at Jordan
and then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor and goeth
out from thence to Hukkok and reacheth to Zebulun on the
south side and reacheth to Asher on the west side and to
Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.
and the fenced cities are Ziddim Zer and Hammath Rakkath
and Chinnereth
and Adamah and Ramah and Hazor
and Kedesh and Edrei and Enhazor
and Iron and Migdalel Horem and Bethanath and Bethshemesh
nineteen cities with their villages.
this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of
Naphtali according to their families the cities and their
villages.
and the seventh Lot came out for the tribe of the children of
Dan according to their families.
and the coast of their inheritance was Zorah and Eshtaol and
Irshemesh
and Shaalabbin and Ajalon and Jethlah
and Elon and Thimnathah and Ekron
and Eltekeh and Gibbethon and Baalath
and Jehud and Beneberak and Gathrimmon
and Mejarkon and Rakkon with the border before Japho.
and the coast of the children of Dan went out too little for
them therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against
Leshem and took it and smote it with the edge of the sword
and possessed it and dwelt therein and called Leshem Dan
after the name of Dan their father.
this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan
according to their families these cities with their villages.
when they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance
by their coasts the children of Israel gave an inheritance to
Joshua the son of Nun among them
according to the word of the lord they gave him the city which
he asked even Timnathserah in mount Ephraim and he built the
city and dwelt therein.
these are the inheritances which Eleazar the priest and
Joshua the son of Nun and the heads of the fathers of the
tribes of the children of Israel divided for an inheritance
by Lot in Shiloh before the lord at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation. so they made an end of
dividing the country.
the lord also spake unto Joshua saying
speak to the children of Israel saying appoint out for you
cities of refuge whereof I spake unto you by the hand of
Moses
that the slayer that killeth any person unawares and
unwittingly may flee thither and they shall be your refuge
from the avenger of blood.
and when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall
stand at the entering of the gate of the city and shall
declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that city they
shall take him into the city unto them and give him a place
that he may dwell among them.
and if the avenger of blood pursue after him then they shall
not deliver the slayer up into his hand because he smote his
neighbour unwittingly and hated him not beforetime.
and he shall dwell in that city until he stand before the
congregation for judgment and until the death of the high
priest that shall be in those days then shall the slayer
return and come unto his own city and unto his own house
unto the city from whence he fled.
and they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali and
Shechem in mount Ephraim and Kirjatharba which is Hebron in
the mountain of Judah.
and on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward they
assigned Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain out of the
tribe of Reuben and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad
and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.
these were the cities appointed for all the children of
Israel and for the stranger that sojourneth among them that
whosoever killeth any person at unawares might flee thither
and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood until he
stood before the congregation.
then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto
Eleazar the priest and unto Joshua the son of Nun and unto
the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of
Israel
and they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan
saying the lord commanded by the hand of Moses to give us
cities to dwell in with the suburbs thereof for our cattle.
and the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their
inheritance at the commandment of the lord these cities and
their suburbs.
and the Lot came out for the families of the Kohathites and
the children of Aaron the priest which were of the Levites
had by Lot out of the tribe of Judah and out of the tribe of
Simeon and out of the tribe of Benjamin thirteen cities.
and the rest of the children of Kohath had by Lot out of the
families of the tribe of Ephraim and out of the tribe of Dan
and out of the half tribe of Manasseh Ten cities.
and the children of Gershon had by Lot out of the families of
the tribe of Issachar and out of the tribe of Asher and out
of the tribe of Naphtali and out of the half tribe of
Manasseh in Bashan thirteen cities.
the children of Merari by their families had out of the tribe
of Reuben and out of the tribe of Gad and out of the tribe
of Zebulun twelve cities.
and the children of Israel gave by Lot unto the Levites these
cities with their suburbs as the lord commanded by the hand
of Moses.
and they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah and
out of the tribe of the children of Simeon these cities which
are here mentioned by name.
which the children of Aaron being of the families of the
Kohathites who were of the children of Levi had for theirs
was the first Lot.
and they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak which
city is Hebron in the hill country of Judah with the suburbs
thereof round about it.
but the fields of the city and the villages thereof gave
they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession.
thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with
her suburbs to be a city of refuge for the slayer and Libnah
with her suburbs
and Jattir with her suburbs and Eshtemoa with her suburbs
and Holon with her suburbs and Debir with her suburbs
and Ain with her suburbs and Juttah with her suburbs and
Bethshemesh with her suburbs nine cities out of those two
tribes.
and out of the tribe of Benjamin Gibeon with her suburbs
Geba with her suburbs
Anathoth with her suburbs and Almon with her suburbs four
cities.
all the cities of the children of Aaron the priests were
thirteen cities with their suburbs.
and the families of the children of Kohath the Levites which
remained of the children of Kohath even they had the cities
of their Lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.
for they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim
to be a city of refuge for the slayer and Gezer with her
suburbs
and Kibzaim with her suburbs and Bethhoron with her suburbs
four cities.
and out of the tribe of Dan Eltekeh with her suburbs
Gibbethon with her suburbs
Aijalon with her suburbs Gathrimmon with her suburbs four
cities.
and out of the half tribe of Manasseh Tanach with her
suburbs and Gathrimmon with her suburbs two cities.
all the cities were Ten with their suburbs for the families of
the children of Kohath that remained.
and unto the children of Gershon of the families of the
Levites out of the other half tribe of Manasseh they gave
Golan in Bashan with her suburbs to be a city of refuge for
the slayer and Beeshterah with her suburbs two cities.
and out of the tribe of Issachar Kishon with her suburbs
Dabareh with her suburbs
Jarmuth with her suburbs Engannim with her suburbs four
cities.
and out of the tribe of Asher Mishal with her suburbs Abdon
with her suburbs
Helkath with her suburbs and Rehob with her suburbs four
cities.
and out of the tribe of Naphtali Kedesh in Galilee with her
suburbs to be a city of refuge for the slayer and Hammothdor
with her suburbs and Kartan with her suburbs three cities.
all the cities of the Gershonites according to their families
were thirteen cities with their suburbs.
and unto the families of the children of Merari the rest of
the Levites out of the tribe of Zebulun Jokneam with her
suburbs and Kartah with her suburbs
Dimnah with her suburbs Nahalal with her suburbs four
cities.
and out of the tribe of Reuben Bezer with her suburbs and
Jahazah with her suburbs
Kedemoth with her suburbs and Mephaath with her suburbs four
cities.
and out of the tribe of Gad Ramoth in Gilead with her
suburbs to be a city of refuge for the slayer and Mahanaim
with her suburbs
Heshbon with her suburbs Jazer with her suburbs four cities
in all.
so all the cities for the children of Merari by their
families which were remaining of the families of the Levites
were by their Lot twelve cities.
all the cities of the Levites within the possession of the
children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their
suburbs.
these cities were every one with their suburbs round about
them thus were all these cities.
and the lord gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to
give unto their fathers and they possessed it and dwelt
therein.
and the lord gave them rest round about according to all that
he sware unto their fathers and there stood not a man of all
their enemies before them the lord delivered all their
enemies into their hand.
there failed not ought of any good thing which the lord had
spoken unto the house of Israel all came to pass.
then Joshua called the Reubenites and the Gadites and the
half tribe of Manasseh
and said unto them ye have kept all that Moses the servant of
the lord commanded you and have obeyed my voice in all that I
commanded you
ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day
but have kept the charge of the commandment of the lord your
God.
and now the lord your God hath given rest unto your brethren
as he promised them therefore now return ye and get you unto
your tents and unto the land of your possession which Moses
the servant of the lord gave you on the other side Jordan.
but take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law
which Moses the servant of the lord charged you to love the
lord your God and to walk in all his ways and to keep his
commandments and to cleave unto him and to serve him with
all your heart and with all your soul.
so Joshua blessed them and sent them away and they went unto
their tents.
now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given
possession in Bashan but unto the other half thereof gave
Joshua among their brethren on this side Jordan westward. and
when Joshua sent them away also unto their tents then he
blessed them
and he spake unto them saying return with Much Riches unto
your tents and with very Much cattle with Silver and with
gold and with brass and with Iron and with very Much
raiment divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren.
and the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the
half tribe of Manasseh returned and departed from the
children of Israel out of Shiloh which is in the land of
Canaan to go unto the country of Gilead to the land of their
possession whereof they were possessed according to the word
of the lord by the hand of Moses.
and when they came unto the borders of Jordan that are in the
land of Canaan the children of Reuben and the children of Gad
and the half tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by Jordan
a great altar to see to.
and the children of Israel heard say behold the children of
Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh
have built an altar over against the land of Canaan in the
borders of Jordan at the passage of the children of Israel.
and when the children of Israel heard of it the whole
congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves
together at Shiloh to go up to war against them.
and the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben
and to the children of Gad and to the half tribe of Manasseh
into the land of Gilead Phinehas the son of Eleazar the
priest
and with him Ten princes of each chief house a prince
throughout all the tribes of Israel and each one was an head
of the house of their fathers among the thousands of Israel.
and they came unto the children of Reuben and to the children
of Gad and to the half tribe of Manasseh unto the land of
Gilead and they spake with them saying
thus saith the whole congregation of the lord what trespass
is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel to
turn away this day from following the lord in that ye have
builded you an altar that ye might rebel this day against the
lord?
is the iniquity of Peor too little for us from which we are
not cleansed until this day although there was a plague in
the congregation of the lord
but that ye must turn away this day from following the lord?
and it will be seeing ye rebel to day against the lord that
to morrow he will be wroth with the whole congregation of
Israel.
notwithstanding if the land of your possession be unclean
then pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the lord
wherein the lord s tabernacle dwelleth and take possession
among us but rebel not against the lord nor rebel against
us in building you an altar beside the altar of the lord our
God.
did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the
accursed thing and wrath fell on all the congregation of
Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity.
then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the
half tribe of Manasseh answered and said unto the heads of
the thousands of Israel
the lord God of gods the lord God of gods he knoweth and
Israel he shall know if it be in rebellion or if in
transgression against the lord save us not this day
that we have built us an altar to turn from following the
lord or if to offer thereon burnt offering or meat offering
or if to offer peace offerings thereon let the lord himself
require it
and if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing
saying in time to come your children might speak unto our
children saying what have ye to do with the lord God of
Israel?
for the lord hath made Jordan a border between us and you ye
children of Reuben and children of Gad ye have no part in the
lord so shall your children make our children cease from
fearing the lord.
therefore we said let us now prepare to build us an altar
not for burnt offering nor for sacrifice
but that it may be a witness between us and you and our
generations after us that we might do the service of the lord
before him with our burnt offerings and with our sacrifices
and with our peace offerings that your children may not say
to our children in time to come ye have no part in the lord.
therefore said we that it shall be when they should so say
to us or to our generations in time to come that we may say
again behold the pattern of the altar of the lord which our
fathers made not for burnt offerings nor for sacrifices but
it is a witness between us and you.
God forbid that we should rebel against the lord and turn
this day from following the lord to build an altar for burnt
offerings for meat offerings or for sacrifices beside the
altar of the lord our God that is before his tabernacle.
and when Phinehas the priest and the princes of the
congregation and heads of the thousands of Israel which were
with him heard the words that the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad and the children of Manasseh spake it pleased
them.
and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the
children of Reuben and to the children of Gad and to the
children of Manasseh this day we perceive that the lord is
among us because ye have not committed this trespass against
the lord now ye have delivered the children of Israel out of
the hand of the lord.
and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest and the princes
returned from the children of Reuben and from the children of
Gad out of the land of Gilead unto the land of Canaan to
the children of Israel and brought them word again.
and the thing pleased the children of Israel and the children
of Israel blessed God and did not intend to go up against
them in battle to destroy the land wherein the children of
Reuben and Gad dwelt.
and the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the
altar Ed for it shall be a witness between us that the lord
is God.
and it came to pass a long time after that the lord had given
rest unto Israel from all their enemies round about that
Joshua waxed old and stricken in age.
and Joshua called for all Israel and for their elders and
for their heads and for their judges and for their officers
and said unto them I Am old and stricken in age
and ye have seen all that the lord your God hath done unto all
these nations because of you for the lord your God is he that
hath fought for you.
behold I have divided unto you by Lot these nations that
remain to be an inheritance for your tribes from Jordan
with all the nations that I have cut off even unto the great
sea westward.
and the lord your God he shall expel them from before you
and drive them from out of your sight and ye shall possess
their land as the lord your God hath promised unto you.
be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is
written in the book of the law of Moses that ye turn not
aside therefrom to the right hand or to the left
that ye come not among these nations these that remain among
you Neither make mention of the name of their gods nor cause
to swear by them Neither serve them nor bow yourselves unto
them
but cleave unto the lord your God as ye have done unto this
day.
for the lord hath driven out from before you great nations and
strong but as for you no man hath been able to stand before
you unto this day.
one man of you shall chase a thousand for the lord your God
he it is that fighteth for you as he hath promised you.
take good heed therefore unto yourselves that ye love the
lord your God.
else if ye do in any wise go back and cleave unto the remnant
of these nations even these that remain among you and shall
make marriages with them and go in unto them and they to
you
know for a certainty that the lord your God will no more drive
out any of these nations from before you but they shall be
snares and traps unto you and scourges in your sides and
thorns in your eyes until ye perish from off this good land
which the lord your God hath given you.
and behold this day I Am going the way of all the earth and
ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls that not one
thing hath failed of all the good things which the lord your
God spake concerning you all are come to pass unto you and
not one thing hath failed thereof.
therefore it shall come to pass that as all good things are
come upon you which the lord your God promised you so shall
the lord bring upon you all evil things until he have
destroyed you from off this good land which the lord your God
hath given you.
when ye have transgressed the covenant of the lord your God
which he commanded you and have gone and served other gods
and bowed yourselves to them then shall the anger of the lord
be kindled against you and ye shall perish quickly from off
the good land which he hath given unto you.
and Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem and
called for the elders of Israel and for their heads and for
their judges and for their officers and they presented
themselves before God.
and Joshua said unto all the people thus saith the lord God
of Israel your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood
in old time even Terah the father of Abraham and the father
of Nachor and they served other gods.
and I took your father Abraham from the other side of the
flood and led him throughout all the land of Canaan and
multiplied his seed and gave him Isaac.
and I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau and I gave unto Esau
mount Seir to possess it but Jacob and his children went
down into Egypt.
I sent Moses also and Aaron and I plagued Egypt according to
that which I did among them and afterward I brought you out.
and I brought your fathers out of Egypt and ye came unto the
sea and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with
chariots and horsemen unto the red sea.
and when they cried unto the lord he put darkness between you
and the Egyptians and brought the sea upon them and covered
them and your eyes have seen what I have done in Egypt and
ye dwelt in the wilderness a long season.
and I brought you into the land of the Amorites which dwelt
on the other side Jordan and they fought with you and I gave
them into your hand that ye might possess their land and I
destroyed them from before you.
then Balak the son of Zippor king of Moab arose and warred
against Israel and sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to
curse you
but I would not hearken unto Balaam therefore he blessed you
still so I delivered you out of his hand.
and you went over Jordan and came unto Jericho and the men
of Jericho fought against you the Amorites and the
Perizzites and the Canaanites and the Hittites and the
Girgashites the Hivites and the Jebusites and I delivered
them into your hand.
and I sent the hornet before you which drave them out from
before you even the two kings of the Amorites but not with
thy sword nor with thy bow.
and I have given you a land for which ye did not labour and
cities which ye built not and ye dwell in them of the
vineyards and oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat.
now therefore fear the lord and serve him in sincerity and in
truth and put away the gods which your fathers served on the
other side of the flood and in Egypt and serve ye the lord.
and if it seem evil unto you to serve the lord choose you
this day whom ye will serve whether the gods which your
fathers served that were on the other side of the flood or
the gods of the Amorites in whose land ye dwell but as for
me and my house we will serve the lord.
and the people answered and said God forbid that we should
forsake the lord to serve other gods
for the lord our God he it is that brought us up and our
fathers out of the land of Egypt from the house of bondage
and which did those great signs in our sight and preserved us
in all the way wherein we went and among all the people
through whom we passed
and the lord drave out from before us all the people even the
Amorites which dwelt in the land therefore will we also serve
the lord for he is our God.
and Joshua said unto the people ye cannot serve the lord for
he is an holy God he is a jealous God he will not forgive
your transgressions nor your sins.
if ye forsake the lord and serve strange gods then he will
turn and do you hurt and consume you after that he hath done
you good.
and the people said unto Joshua nay but we will serve the
lord.
and Joshua said unto the people ye are witnesses against
yourselves that ye have chosen you the lord to serve him. and
they said we are witnesses.
now therefore put away said he the strange gods which are
among you and incline your heart unto the lord God of Israel.
and the people said unto Joshua the lord our God will we
serve and his voice will we obey.
so Joshua made a covenant with the people that day and set
them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem.
and Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God
and took a great stone and set it up there under an oak that
was by the sanctuary of the lord.
and Joshua said unto all the people behold this stone shall
be a witness unto us for it hath heard all the words of the
lord which he spake unto us it shall be therefore a witness
unto you lest ye deny your God.
so Joshua let the people depart every man unto his
inheritance.
and it came to pass after these things that Joshua the son of
Nun the servant of the lord died being an hundred and Ten
years old.
and they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnathserah which is in mount Ephraim on the north side of
the hill of Gaash.
and Israel served the lord all the days of Joshua and all the
days of the elders that overlived Joshua and which had known
all the works of the lord that he had done for Israel.
and the bones of Joseph which the children of Israel brought
up out of Egypt buried they in Shechem in a parcel of ground
which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem
for an hundred pieces of Silver and it became the inheritance
of the children of Joseph.
and Eleazar the son of Aaron died and they buried him in a
hill that pertained to Phinehas his son which was given him
in mount Ephraim.
now after the death of Joshua it came to pass that the
children of Israel asked the lord saying who shall go up for
us against the Canaanites first to fight against them?
and the lord said Judah shall go up behold I have delivered
the land into his hand.
and Judah said unto Simeon his brother come up with me into
my Lot that we may fight against the Canaanites and I
likewise will go with thee into thy Lot. so Simeon went with
him.
and Judah went up and the lord delivered the Canaanites and
the Perizzites into their hand and they slew of them in Bezek
Ten thousand men.
and they found Adonibezek in Bezek and they fought against
him and they slew the Canaanites and the Perizzites.
but Adonibezek fled and they pursued after him and caught
him and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.
and Adonibezek said threescore and Ten kings having their
thumbs and their great toes cut off gathered their meat under
my table as I have done so God hath requited me. and they
brought him to Jerusalem and there he died.
now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem and
had taken it and smitten it with the edge of the sword and
set the city on fire.
and afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against
the Canaanites that dwelt in the mountain and in the south
and in the valley.
and Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron
 now the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba and they slew
Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai.
and from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir and
the name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher
and Caleb said he that smiteth Kirjathsepher and taketh it
to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.
and Othniel the son of Kenaz Caleb s younger brother took
it and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
and it came to pass when she came to him that she moved him
to ask of her father a field and she lighted from off her
ass and Caleb said unto her what wilt thou?
and she said unto him give me a blessing for thou hast given
me a south land give me also springs of water. and Caleb gave
her the upper springs and the nether springs.
and the children of the Kenite Moses father in law went up
out of the city of palm trees with the children of Judah into
the wilderness of Judah which lieth in the south of Arad and
they went and dwelt among the people.
and Judah went with Simeon his brother and they slew the
Canaanites that inhabited Zephath and utterly destroyed it.
and the name of the city was called Hormah.
also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof and Askelon with
the coast thereof and Ekron with the coast thereof.
and the lord was with Judah and he drave out the inhabitants
of the mountain but could not drive out the inhabitants of
the valley because they had chariots of Iron.
and they gave Hebron unto Caleb as Moses said and he
expelled thence the three sons of Anak.
and the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites
that inhabited Jerusalem but the Jebusites dwell with the
children of Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day.
and the house of Joseph they also went up against Bethel and
the lord was with them.
and the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. now the name
of the city before was Luz.
and the spies saw a man come forth out of the city and they
said unto him shew us we pray thee the entrance into the
city and we will shew thee mercy.
and when he shewed them the entrance into the city they smote
the city with the edge of the sword but they let go the man
and all his family.
and the man went into the land of the Hittites and built a
city and called the name thereof Luz which is the name
thereof unto this day.
Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean
and her towns nor Taanach and her towns nor the inhabitants
of Dor and her towns nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her
towns nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns but the
Canaanites would dwell in that land.
and it came to pass when Israel was strong that they put the
Canaanites to tribute and did not utterly drive them out.
Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in
Gezer but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.
Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron nor
the inhabitants of Nahalol but the Canaanites dwelt among
them and became tributaries.
Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho nor the
inhabitants of Zidon nor of Ahlab nor of Achzib nor of
Helbah nor of Aphik nor of Rehob
but the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites the inhabitants
of the land for they did not drive them out.
Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Bethshemesh
nor the inhabitants of Bethanath but he dwelt among the
Canaanites the inhabitants of the land nevertheless the
inhabitants of Bethshemesh and of Bethanath became tributaries
unto them.
and the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain
for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley
but the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon and in
Shaalbim yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed so
that they became tributaries.
and the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to
Akrabbim from the rock and upward.
and an angel of the lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim and
said I made you to go up out of Egypt and have brought you
unto the land which I sware unto your fathers and I said I
will never break my covenant with you.
and ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land
ye shall throw down their altars but ye have not obeyed my
voice why have ye done this?
wherefore I also said I will not drive them out from before
you but they shall be as thorns in your sides and their gods
shall be a snare unto you.
and it came to pass when the angel of the lord spake these
words unto all the children of Israel that the people lifted
up their voice and wept.
and they called the name of that place Bochim and they
sacrificed there unto the lord.
and when Joshua had let the people go the children of Israel
went every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.
and the people served the lord all the days of Joshua and all
the days of the elders that outlived Joshua who had seen all
the great works of the lord that he did for Israel.
and Joshua the son of Nun the servant of the lord died
being an hundred and Ten years old.
and they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnathheres in the mount of Ephraim on the north side of
the hill Gaash.
and also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers
and there arose another generation after them which knew not
the lord nor yet the works which he had done for Israel.
and the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the lord
and served Baalim
and they forsook the lord God of their fathers which brought
them out of the land of Egypt and followed other gods of the
gods of the people that were round about them and bowed
themselves unto them and provoked the lord to anger.
and they forsook the lord and served Baal and Ashtaroth.
and the anger of the lord was hot against Israel and he
delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them
and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about
so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies.
whithersoever they went out the hand of the lord was against
them for evil as the lord had said and as the lord had sworn
unto them and they were greatly distressed.
nevertheless the lord raised up judges which delivered them
out of the hand of those that spoiled them.
and yet they would not hearken unto their judges but they
went a whoring after other gods and bowed themselves unto
them they turned quickly out of the way which their fathers
walked in obeying the commandments of the lord but they did
not so.
and when the lord raised them up judges then the lord was
with the judge and delivered them out of the hand of their
enemies all the days of the judge for it repented the lord
because of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed
them and vexed them.
and it came to pass when the judge was dead that they
returned and corrupted themselves more than their fathers in
following other gods to serve them and to bow down unto them
they ceased not from their own doings nor from their stubborn
way.
and the anger of the lord was hot against Israel and he said
because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I
commanded their fathers and have not hearkened unto my voice
I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of
the nations which Joshua left when he died
that through them I may prove Israel whether they will keep
the way of the lord to walk therein as their fathers did keep
it or not.
therefore the lord left those nations without driving them
out hastily Neither delivered he them into the hand of
Joshua.
now these are the nations which the lord left to prove Israel
by them even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars
of Canaan
only that the generations of the children of Israel might
know to teach them war at the least such as before knew
nothing thereof
namely five lords of the Philistines and all the Canaanites
and the Sidonians and the Hivites that dwelt in mount
Lebanon from mount Baalhermon unto the entering in of Hamath.
and they were to prove Israel by them to know whether they
would hearken unto the commandments of the lord which he
commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses.
and the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites
Hittites and Amorites and Perizzites and Hivites and
Jebusites
and they took their daughters to be their wives and gave
their daughters to their sons and served their gods.
and the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the lord
and forgat the lord their God and served Baalim and the
groves.
therefore the anger of the lord was hot against Israel and he
sold them into the hand of Chushanrishathaim king of
Mesopotamia and the children of Israel served
Chushanrishathaim eight years.
and when the children of Israel cried unto the lord the lord
raised up a deliverer to the children of Israel who delivered
them even Othniel the son of Kenaz Caleb s younger brother.
and the spirit of the lord came upon him and he judged
Israel and went out to war and the lord delivered
Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand and his
hand prevailed against Chushanrishathaim.
and the land had rest forty years. and Othniel the son of
Kenaz died.
and the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord and the lord strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against
Israel because they had done evil in the sight of the lord.
and he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek and
went and smote Israel and possessed the city of palm trees.
so the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab
eighteen years.
but when the children of Israel cried unto the lord the lord
raised them up a deliverer Ehud the son of Gera a Benjamite
a man lefthanded and by him the children of Israel sent a
present unto Eglon the king of Moab.
but Ehud made him a dagger which had two edges of a cubit
length and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right
thigh.
and he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab and Eglon
was a very fat man.
and when he had made an end to offer the present he sent away
the people that bare the present.
but he himself turned again from the quarries that were by
Gilgal and said I have a secret errand unto thee O king
who said keep silence. and all that stood by him went out
from him.
and Ehud came unto him and he was sitting in a summer
parlour which he had for himself alone. and Ehud said I have
a message from God unto thee. and he arose out of his seat.
and Ehud put forth his left hand and took the dagger from his
right thigh and thrust it into his belly
and the haft also went in after the blade and the fat closed
upon the blade so that he could not draw the dagger out of
his belly and the dirt came out.
then Ehud went forth through the porch and shut the doors of
the parlour upon him and locked them.
when he was gone out his servants came and when they saw
that behold the doors of the parlour were locked they said
surely he covereth his feet in his summer chamber.
and they tarried till they were ashamed and behold he
opened not the doors of the parlour therefore they took a
key and opened them and behold their lord was fallen down
dead on the earth.
and Ehud escaped while they tarried and passed beyond the
quarries and escaped unto Seirath.
and it came to pass when he was come that he blew a trumpet
in the mountain of Ephraim and the children of Israel went
down with him from the mount and he before them.
and he said unto them follow after me for the lord hath
delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. and they
went down after him and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab
and suffered not a man to pass over.
and they slew of Moab at that time about Ten thousand men all
lusty and all men of valour and there escaped not a man.
so Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. and the
land had rest fourscore years.
and after him was Shamgar the son of Anath which slew of the
Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad and he also
delivered Israel.
and the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the
lord when Ehud was dead.
and the lord sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan
that reigned in Hazor the captain of whose host was Sisera
which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles.
and the children of Israel cried unto the lord for he had
nine hundred chariots of Iron and twenty years he mightily
oppressed the children of Israel.
and Deborah a prophetess the wife of Lapidoth she judged
Israel at that time.
and she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and
Bethel in mount Ephraim and the children of Israel came up to
her for judgment.
and she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of
Kedeshnaphtali and said unto him hath not the lord God of
Israel commanded saying go and draw toward mount Tabor and
take with thee Ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali
and of the children of Zebulun?
and I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera the
captain of Jabin s army with his chariots and his multitude
and I will deliver him into thine hand.
and Barak said unto her if thou wilt go with me then I will
go but if thou wilt not go with me then I will not go.
and she said I will surely go with thee notwithstanding the
journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour for
the lord shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. and
Deborah arose and went with Barak to Kedesh.
and Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh and he went
up with Ten thousand men at his feet and Deborah went up with
him.
now Heber the Kenite which was of the children of Hobab the
father in law of Moses had severed himself from the Kenites
and pitched his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim which is by
Kedesh.
and they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone
up to mount Tabor.
and Sisera gathered together all his chariots even nine
hundred chariots of Iron and all the people that were with
him from Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.
and Deborah said unto Barak up for this is the day in which
the lord hath delivered Sisera into thine hand is not the
lord gone out before thee? so Barak went down from mount
Tabor and Ten thousand men after him.
and the lord discomfited Sisera and all his chariots and all
his host with the edge of the sword before Barak so that
Sisera lighted down off his chariot and fled away on his
feet.
but Barak pursued after the chariots and after the host unto
Harosheth of the Gentiles and all the host of Sisera fell
upon the edge of the sword and there was not a man left.
howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the
wife of Heber the Kenite for there was peace between Jabin
the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.
and Jael went out to meet Sisera and said unto him turn in
my lord turn in to me fear not. and when he had turned in
unto her into the tent she covered him with a mantle.
and he said unto her give me I pray thee a little water to
drink for I Am thirsty. and she opened a bottle of milk and
gave him drink and covered him.
again he said unto her stand in the door of the tent and it
shall be when any man doth come and enquire of thee and say
is there any man here? that thou shalt say no.
then Jael Heber s wife took a nail of the tent and took an
hammer in her hand and went softly unto him and smote the
nail into his temples and fastened it into the ground for he
was fast asleep and weary. so he died.
and behold as Barak pursued Sisera Jael came out to meet
him and said unto him come and I will shew thee the man
whom thou seekest. and when he came into her tent behold
Sisera lay dead and the nail was in his temples.
so God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the
children of Israel.
and the hand of the children of Israel prospered and
prevailed against Jabin the king of Canaan until they had
destroyed Jabin king of Canaan.
then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day
saying
praise ye the lord for the avenging of Israel when the people
willingly offered themselves.
hear O ye kings give ear O ye princes I even I will sing
unto the lord I will sing praise to the lord God of Israel.
lord when thou wentest out of Seir when thou marchedst out
of the field of Edom the earth trembled and the heavens
dropped the clouds also dropped water.
the mountains melted from before the lord even that Sinai
from before the lord God of Israel.
in the days of Shamgar the son of Anath in the days of Jael
the highways were unoccupied and the travellers walked
through byways.
the inhabitants of the villages ceased they ceased in Israel
until that I Deborah arose that I arose a mother in Israel.
they chose new gods then was war in the gates was there a
shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?
my heart is toward the governors of Israel that offered
themselves willingly among the people. bless ye the lord.
speak ye that ride on white asses ye that sit in judgment
and walk by the way.
they that are delivered from the noise of archers in the
places of drawing water there shall they rehearse the
righteous acts of the lord even the righteous acts toward the
inhabitants of his villages in Israel then shall the people
of the lord go down to the gates.
awake awake Deborah awake awake utter a song Arise
Barak and lead thy captivity captive thou son of Abinoam.
then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles
among the people the lord made me have dominion over the
Mighty.
out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek after
thee Benjamin among thy people out of Machir came down
governors and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the
writer.
and the princes of Issachar were with Deborah even Issachar
and also Barak he was sent on foot into the valley. for the
divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.
why abodest thou among the sheepfolds to hear the bleatings
of the flocks? for the divisions of Reuben there were great
searchings of heart.
Gilead abode beyond Jordan and why did Dan remain in ships?
Asher continued on the sea shore and abode in his breaches.
Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives
unto the death in the high places of the field.
the kings came and fought then fought the kings of Canaan in
Taanach by the waters of Megiddo they took no gain of money.
they fought from heaven the stars in their courses fought
against Sisera.
the river of Kishon swept them away that ancient river the
river Kishon. O my soul thou hast trodden down strength.
then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings
the pransings of their Mighty ones.
curse ye Meroz said the angel of the lord curse ye bitterly
the inhabitants thereof because they came not to the help of
the lord to the help of the lord against the Mighty.
blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite
be blessed shall she be above women in the tent.
he asked water and she gave him milk she brought forth
butter in a lordly dish.
she put her hand to the nail and her right hand to the
workmen s hammer and with the hammer she smote Sisera she
smote off his head when she had pierced and stricken through
his temples.
at her feet he bowed he fell he lay down at her feet he
bowed he fell where he bowed there he fell down dead.
the mother of Sisera looked out at a window and cried through
the lattice why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry
the wheels of his chariots?
her wise ladies answered her yea she returned answer to
herself
have they not sped? have they not divided the prey to every
man a damsel or two to Sisera a prey of divers colours a
prey of divers colours of needlework of divers colours of
needlework on both sides meet for the necks of them that take
the spoil?
so let all thine enemies perish O lord but let them that
love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. and
the land had rest forty years.
and the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the lord
and the lord delivered them into the hand of Midian seven
years.
and the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel and because
of the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens
which are in the mountains and caves and strong holds.
and so it was when Israel had sown that the Midianites came
up and the Amalekites and the children of the east even
they came up against them
and they encamped against them and destroyed the increase of
the earth till thou come unto Gaza and left no sustenance
for Israel Neither sheep nor ox nor ass.
for they came up with their cattle and their tents and they
came as grasshoppers for multitude for both they and their
camels were without number and they entered into the land to
destroy it.
and Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites
and the children of Israel cried unto the lord.
and it came to pass when the children of Israel cried unto
the lord because of the Midianites
that the lord sent a prophet unto the children of Israel
which said unto them thus saith the lord God of Israel I
brought you up from Egypt and brought you forth out of the
house of bondage
and I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians and out
of the hand of all that oppressed you and drave them out from
before you and gave you their land
and I said unto you I Am the lord your God fear not the gods
of the Amorites in whose land ye dwell but ye have not
obeyed my voice.
and there came an angel of the lord and sat under an oak
which was in Ophrah that pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite
and his son Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress to hide it
from the Midianites.
and the angel of the lord appeared unto him and said unto
him the lord is with thee thou Mighty man of valour.
and Gideon said unto him oh my lord if the lord be with us
why then is all this befallen us? and where be all his
miracles which our fathers told us of saying did not the
lord bring us up from Egypt? but now the lord hath forsaken
us and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites.
and the lord looked upon him and said go in this thy might
and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites
have not I sent thee?
and he said unto him oh my lord wherewith shall I save
Israel? behold my family is poor in Manasseh and I Am the
least in my father s house.
and the lord said unto him surely I will be with thee and
thou shalt smite the Midianites as one man.
and he said unto him if now I have found grace in thy sight
then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me.
depart not hence I pray thee until I come unto thee and
bring forth my present and set it before thee. and he said I
will tarry until thou come again.
and Gideon went in and made ready a kid and unleavened cakes
of an Ephah of flour the flesh he put in a basket and he put
the broth in a pot and brought it out unto him under the oak
and presented it.
and the angel of God said unto him take the flesh and the
unleavened cakes and lay them upon this rock and pour out
the broth. and he did so.
then the angel of the lord put forth the end of the staff that
was in his hand and touched the flesh and the unleavened
cakes and there rose up fire out of the rock and consumed
the flesh and the unleavened cakes. then the angel of the lord
departed out of his sight.
and when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the lord
Gideon said alas O lord God for because I have seen an
angel of the lord face to face.
and the lord said unto him peace be unto thee fear not thou
shalt not die.
then Gideon built an altar there unto the lord and called it
Jehovahshalom unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the
Abiezrites.
and it came to pass the same night that the lord said unto
him take thy father s young bullock even the second bullock
of seven years old and throw down the altar of Baal that thy
father hath and cut down the grove that is by it
and build an altar unto the lord thy God upon the top of this
rock in the ordered place and take the second bullock and
offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the grove which thou
shalt cut down.
then Gideon took Ten men of his servants and did as the lord
had said unto him and so it was because he feared his
father s household and the men of the city that he could not
do it by day that he did it by night.
and when the men of the city arose early in the morning
behold the altar of Baal was cast down and the grove was cut
down that was by it and the second bullock was offered upon
the altar that was built.
and they said one to another who hath done this thing? and
when they enquired and asked they said Gideon the son of
Joash hath done this thing.
then the men of the city said unto Joash bring out thy son
that he may die because he hath cast down the altar of Baal
and because he hath cut down the grove that was by it.
and Joash said unto all that stood against him will ye plead
for Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him let
him be put to death whilst it is yet morning if he be a God
let him plead for himself because one hath cast down his
altar.
therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal saying let
Baal plead against him because he hath thrown down his altar.
then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of
the east were gathered together and went over and pitched in
the valley of Jezreel.
but the spirit of the lord came upon Gideon and he blew a
trumpet and Abiezer was gathered after him.
and he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh who also was
gathered after him and he sent messengers unto Asher and
unto Zebulun and unto Naphtali and they came up to meet
them.
and Gideon said unto God if thou wilt save Israel by mine
hand as thou hast said
behold I will put a fleece of wool in the floor and if the
dew be on the fleece only and it be dry upon all the earth
beside then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine
hand as thou hast said.
and it was so for he rose up early on the morrow and thrust
the fleece together and wringed the dew out of the fleece a
bowl full of water.
and Gideon said unto God let not thine anger be hot against
me and I will speak but this once let me prove I pray thee
but this once with the fleece let it now be dry only upon the
fleece and upon all the ground let there be dew.
and God did so that night for it was dry upon the fleece
only and there was dew on all the ground.
then Jerubbaal who is Gideon and all the people that were
with him rose up early and pitched beside the well of Harod
so that the host of the Midianites were on the north side of
them by the hill of Moreh in the valley.
and the lord said unto Gideon the people that are with thee
are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands
lest Israel vaunt themselves against me saying mine own hand
hath saved me.
now therefore go to proclaim in the ears of the people
saying whosoever is fearful and afraid let him return and
depart early from mount Gilead. and there returned of the
people twenty and two thousand and there remained Ten
thousand.
and the lord said unto Gideon the people are yet too many
bring them down unto the water and I will try them for thee
there and it shall be that of whom I say unto thee this
shall go with thee the same shall go with thee and of
whomsoever I say unto thee this shall not go with thee the
same shall not go.
so he brought down the people unto the water and the lord
said unto Gideon every one that lappeth of the water with his
tongue as a dog lappeth him shalt thou set by himself
likewise every one that boweth down upon his knees to drink.
and the number of them that lapped putting their hand to
their mouth were three hundred men but all the rest of the
people bowed down upon their knees to drink water.
and the lord said unto Gideon by the three hundred men that
lapped will I save you and deliver the Midianites into thine
hand and let all the other people go every man unto his
place.
so the people took victuals in their hand and their trumpets
and he sent all the rest of Israel every man unto his tent
and retained those three hundred men and the host of Midian
was beneath him in the valley.
and it came to pass the same night that the lord said unto
him Arise get thee down unto the host for I have delivered
it into thine hand.
but if thou fear to go down go thou with Phurah thy servant
down to the host
and thou shalt hear what they say and afterward shall thine
hands be strengthened to go down unto the host. then went he
down with Phurah his servant unto the outside of the armed men
that were in the host.
and the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of
the east lay along in the valley like grasshoppers for
multitude and their camels were without number as the sand
by the sea side for multitude.
and when Gideon was come behold there was a man that told a
dream unto his fellow and said behold I dreamed a dream
and lo a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of
Midian and came unto a tent and smote it that it fell and
overturned it that the tent lay along.
and his fellow answered and said this is nothing else save
the sword of Gideon the son of Joash a man of Israel for
into his hand hath God delivered Midian and all the host.
and it was so when Gideon heard the telling of the dream and
the interpretation thereof that he worshipped and returned
into the host of Israel and said Arise for the lord hath
delivered into your hand the host of Midian.
and he divided the three hundred men into three companies and
he put a trumpet in every man s hand with empty pitchers and
lamps within the pitchers.
and he said unto them look on me and do likewise and
behold when I come to the outside of the camp it shall be
that as I do so shall ye do.
when I blow with a trumpet I and all that are with me then
blow ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp and
say the sword of the lord and of Gideon.
so Gideon and the hundred men that were with him came unto
the outside of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch
and they had but newly set the watch and they blew the
trumpets and brake the pitchers that were in their hands.
and the three companies blew the trumpets and brake the
pitchers and held the lamps in their left hands and the
trumpets in their right hands to blow withal and they cried
the sword of the lord and of Gideon.
and they stood every man in his place round about the camp
and all the host ran and cried and fled.
and the three hundred blew the trumpets and the lord set
every man s sword against his fellow even throughout all the
host and the host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath and to the
border of Abelmeholah unto Tabbath.
and the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of
Naphtali and out of Asher and out of all Manasseh and
pursued after the Midianites.
and Gideon sent messengers throughout all mount Ephraim
saying come down against the Midianites and take before them
the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan. then all the men of
Ephraim gathered themselves together and took the waters unto
Bethbarah and Jordan.
and they took two princes of the Midianites Oreb and Zeeb
and they slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb and Zeeb they slew at
the winepress of Zeeb and pursued Midian and brought the
heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon on the other side Jordan.
and the men of Ephraim said unto him why hast thou served us
thus that thou calledst us not when thou wentest to fight
with the Midianites? and they did chide with him sharply.
and he said unto them what have I done now in comparison of
you? is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than
the vintage of Abiezer?
God hath delivered into your hands the princes of Midian Oreb
and Zeeb and what was I able to do in comparison of you? then
their anger was abated toward him when he had said that.
and Gideon came to Jordan and passed over he and the three
hundred men that were with him faint yet pursuing them.
and he said unto the men of Succoth give I pray you loaves
of bread unto the people that follow me for they be faint
and I Am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna kings of Midian.
and the princes of Succoth said are the hands of Zebah and
Zalmunna now in thine hand that we should give bread unto
thine army?
and Gideon said therefore when the lord hath delivered Zebah
and Zalmunna into mine hand then I will tear your flesh with
the thorns of the wilderness and with briers.
and he went up thence to Penuel and spake unto them likewise
and the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had
answered him.
and he spake also unto the men of Penuel saying when I come
again in peace I will break down this tower.
now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor and their hosts with
them about fifteen thousand men all that were left of all
the hosts of the children of the east for there fell an
hundred and twenty thousand men that drew sword.
and Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on
the east of Nobah and Jogbehah and smote the host for the
host was secure.
and when Zebah and Zalmunna fled he pursued after them and
took the two kings of Midian Zebah and Zalmunna and
discomfited all the host.
and Gideon the son of Joash returned from battle before the
sun was up
and caught a young man of the men of Succoth and enquired of
him and he described unto him the princes of Succoth and the
elders thereof even threescore and seventeen men.
and he came unto the men of Succoth and said behold Zebah
and Zalmunna with whom ye did upbraid me saying are the
hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand that we should
give bread unto thy men that are weary?
and he took the elders of the city and thorns of the
wilderness and briers and with them he taught the men of
Succoth.
and he beat down the tower of Penuel and slew the men of the
city.
then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna what manner of men were
they whom ye slew at Tabor? and they answered as thou art so
were they each one resembled the children of a king.
and he said they were my brethren even the sons of my
mother as the lord liveth if ye had saved them alive I
would not slay you.
and he said unto Jether his firstborn up and slay them. but
the youth drew not his sword for he feared because he was
yet a youth.
then Zebah and Zalmunna said rise thou and fall upon us for
as the man is so is his strength. and Gideon arose and slew
Zebah and Zalmunna and took away the ornaments that were on
their camels necks.
then the men of Israel said unto Gideon rule thou over us
both thou and thy son and thy son s son also for thou hast
delivered us from the hand of Midian.
and Gideon said unto them I will not rule over you Neither
shall my son rule over you the lord shall rule over you.
and Gideon said unto them I would desire a request of you
that ye would give me every man the earrings of his prey. for
they had golden earrings because they were Ishmaelites.
and they answered we will willingly give them. and they
spread a garment and did cast therein every man the earrings
of his prey.
and the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a
thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold beside ornaments
and collars and purple raiment that was on the kings of
Midian and beside the chains that were about their camels
necks.
and Gideon made an Ephod thereof and put it in his city even
in Ophrah and all Israel went thither a whoring after it
which thing became a snare unto Gideon and to his house.
thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel so that
they lifted up their heads no more. and the country was in
quietness forty years in the days of Gideon.
and Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own
house.
and Gideon had threescore and Ten sons of his body begotten
for he had many wives.
and his concubine that was in Shechem she also bare him a
son whose name he called Abimelech.
and Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age and was
buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father in Ophrah of the
Abiezrites.
and it came to pass as soon as Gideon was dead that the
children of Israel turned again and went a whoring after
Baalim and made Baalberith their God.
and the children of Israel remembered not the lord their God
who had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies
on every side
Neither shewed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal
namely Gideon according to all the goodness which he had
shewed unto Israel.
and Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his
mother s brethren and communed with them and with all the
family of the house of his mother s father saying
speak I pray you in the ears of all the men of Shechem
whether is better for you either that all the sons of
Jerubbaal which are threescore and Ten persons reign over
you or that one reign over you? remember also that I Am your
bone and your flesh.
and his mother s brethren spake of him in the ears of all the
men of Shechem all these words and their hearts inclined to
follow Abimelech for they said he is our brother.
and they gave him threescore and Ten pieces of Silver out of
the house of Baalberith wherewith Abimelech hired vain and
light persons which followed him.
and he went unto his father s house at Ophrah and slew his
brethren the sons of Jerubbaal being threescore and Ten
persons upon one stone notwithstanding yet Jotham the
youngest son of Jerubbaal was left for he hid himself.
and all the men of Shechem gathered together and all the
house of Millo and went and made Abimelech king by the
plain of the pillar that was in Shechem.
and when they told it to Jotham he went and stood in the top
of mount Gerizim and lifted up his voice and cried and said
unto them hearken unto me ye men of Shechem that God may
hearken unto you.
the trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them and
they said unto the olive tree reign thou over us.
but the olive tree said unto them should I leave my fatness
wherewith by me they honour God and man and go to be promoted
over the trees?
and the trees said to the fig tree come thou and reign over
us.
but the fig tree said unto them should I forsake my
sweetness and my good fruit and go to be promoted over the
trees?
then said the trees unto the vine come thou and reign over
us.
and the vine said unto them should I leave my wine which
cheereth God and man and go to be promoted over the trees?
then said all the trees unto the bramble come thou and reign
over us.
and the bramble said unto the trees if in truth ye anoint me
king over you then come and put your trust in my shadow and
if not let fire come out of the bramble and devour the
cedars of Lebanon.
now therefore if ye have done truly and sincerely in that ye
have made Abimelech king and if ye have dealt well with
Jerubbaal and his house and have done unto him according to
the deserving of his hands
 for my father fought for you and adventured his life far
and delivered you out of the hand of Midian
and ye are risen up against my father s house this day and
have slain his sons threescore and Ten persons upon one
stone and have made Abimelech the son of his maidservant
king over the men of Shechem because he is your brother
if ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with Jerubbaal and
with his house this day then rejoice ye in Abimelech and let
him also rejoice in you
but if not let fire come out from Abimelech and devour the
men of Shechem and the house of Millo and let fire come out
from the men of Shechem and from the house of Millo and
devour Abimelech.
and Jotham ran away and fled and went to Beer and dwelt
there for fear of Abimelech his brother.
when Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel
then God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of
Shechem and the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with
Abimelech
that the cruelty done to the threescore and Ten sons of
Jerubbaal might come and their blood be laid upon Abimelech
their brother which slew them and upon the men of Shechem
which aided him in the killing of his brethren.
and the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of
the mountains and they robbed all that came along that way by
them and it was told Abimelech.
and Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren and went over
to Shechem and the men of Shechem put their confidence in
him.
and they went out into the fields and gathered their
vineyards and trode the grapes and made merry and went into
the house of their God and did eat and drink and cursed
Abimelech.
and Gaal the son of Ebed said who is Abimelech and who is
Shechem that we should serve him? is not he the son of
Jerubbaal? and Zebul his officer? serve the men of Hamor the
father of Shechem for why should we serve him?
and would to God this people were under my hand then would I
remove Abimelech. and he said to Abimelech increase thine
army and come out.
and when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal
the son of Ebed his anger was kindled.
and he sent messengers unto Abimelech privily saying behold
Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Shechem and
behold they fortify the city against thee.
now therefore up by night thou and the people that is with
thee and lie in wait in the field
and it shall be that in the morning as soon as the sun is
up thou shalt rise early and set upon the city and behold
when he and the people that is with him come out against thee
then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find occasion.
and Abimelech rose up and all the people that were with him
by night and they laid wait against Shechem in four
companies.
and Gaal the son of Ebed went out and stood in the entering
of the gate of the city and Abimelech rose up and the people
that were with him from lying in wait.
and when Gaal saw the people he said to Zebul behold there
come people down from the top of the mountains. and Zebul said
unto him thou seest the shadow of the mountains as if they
were men.
and Gaal spake again and said see there come people down by
the middle of the land and another company come along by the
plain of Meonenim.
then said Zebul unto him where is now thy mouth wherewith
thou saidst who is Abimelech that we should serve him? is
not this the people that thou hast despised? go out I pray
now and fight with them.
and Gaal went out before the men of Shechem and fought with
Abimelech.
and Abimelech chased him and he fled before him and many
were overthrown and wounded even unto the entering of the
gate.
and Abimelech dwelt at Arumah and Zebul thrust out Gaal and
his brethren that they should not dwell in Shechem.
and it came to pass on the morrow that the people went out
into the field and they told Abimelech.
and he took the people and divided them into three companies
and laid wait in the field and looked and behold the
people were come forth out of the city and he rose up against
them and smote them.
and Abimelech and the company that was with him rushed
forward and stood in the entering of the gate of the city
and the two other companies ran upon all the people that were
in the fields and slew them.
and Abimelech fought against the city all that day and he
took the city and slew the people that was therein and beat
down the city and sowed it with salt.
and when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that they
entered into an hold of the house of the God Berith.
and it was told Abimelech that all the men of the tower of
Shechem were gathered together.
and Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon he and all the
people that were with him and Abimelech took an axe in his
hand and cut down a bough from the trees and took it and
laid it on his shoulder and said unto the people that were
with him what ye have seen me do make haste and do as I
have done.
and all the people likewise cut down every man his bough and
followed Abimelech and put them to the hold and set the hold
on fire upon them so that all the men of the tower of Shechem
died also about a thousand men and women.
then went Abimelech to Thebez and encamped against Thebez
and took it.
but there was a strong tower within the city and thither fled
all the men and women and all they of the city and shut it
to them and gat them up to the top of the tower.
and Abimelech came unto the tower and fought against it and
went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.
and a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon
Abimelech s head and all to brake his skull.
then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer
and said unto him draw thy sword and slay me that men say
not of me a women slew him. and his young man thrust him
through and he died.
and when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead they
departed every man unto his place.
thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech which he did
unto his father in slaying his seventy brethren
and all the evil of the men of Shechem did God render upon
their heads and upon them came the curse of Jotham the son of
Jerubbaal.
and after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son
of Puah the son of Dodo a man of Issachar and he dwelt in
Shamir in mount Ephraim.
and he judged Israel twenty and three years and died and was
buried in Shamir.
and after him arose Jair a Gileadite and judged Israel
twenty and two years.
and he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts and they
had thirty cities which are called Havothjair unto this day
which are in the land of Gilead.
and Jair died and was buried in Camon.
and the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord and served Baalim and Ashtaroth and the gods of Syria
and the gods of Zidon and the gods of Moab and the gods of
the children of Ammon and the gods of the Philistines and
forsook the lord and served not him.
and the anger of the lord was hot against Israel and he sold
them into the hands of the Philistines and into the hands of
the children of Ammon.
and that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel
eighteen years all the children of Israel that were on the
other side Jordan in the land of the Amorites which is in
Gilead.
moreover the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight
also against Judah and against Benjamin and against the
house of Ephraim so that Israel was sore distressed.
and the children of Israel cried unto the lord saying we
have sinned against thee both because we have forsaken our
God and also served Baalim.
and the lord said unto the children of Israel did not I
deliver you from the Egyptians and from the Amorites from
the children of Ammon and from the Philistines?
the Zidonians also and the Amalekites and the Maonites did
oppress you and ye cried to me and I delivered you out of
their hand.
yet ye have forsaken me and served other gods wherefore I
will deliver you no more.
go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen let them
deliver you in the time of your tribulation.
and the children of Israel said unto the lord we have sinned
do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee deliver us
only we pray thee this day.
and they put away the strange gods from among them and served
the lord and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.
then the children of Ammon were gathered together and
encamped in Gilead. and the children of Israel assembled
themselves together and encamped in Mizpeh.
and the people and princes of Gilead said one to another what
man is he that will begin to fight against the children of
Ammon? he shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.
now Jephthah the Gileadite was a Mighty man of valour and he
was the son of an harlot and Gilead begat Jephthah.
and Gilead s wife bare him sons and his wife s sons grew up
and they thrust out Jephthah and said unto him thou shalt
not inherit in our father s house for thou art the son of a
strange woman.
then Jephthah fled from his brethren and dwelt in the land of
Tob and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah and went
out with him.
and it came to pass in process of time that the children of
Ammon made war against Israel.
and it was so that when the children of Ammon made war
against Israel the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah
out of the land of Tob
and they said unto Jephthah come and be our captain that we
may fight with the children of Ammon.
and Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead did not ye hate
me and expel me out of my father s house? and why are ye come
unto me now when ye are in distress?
and the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah therefore we turn
again to thee now that thou mayest go with us and fight
against the children of Ammon and be our head over all the
inhabitants of Gilead.
and Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead if ye bring me
home again to fight against the children of Ammon and the
lord deliver them before me shall I be your head?
and the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah the lord be
witness between us if we do not so according to thy words.
then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead and the people
made him head and captain over them and Jephthah uttered all
his words before the lord in Mizpeh.
and Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of
Ammon saying what hast thou to do with me that thou art
come against me to fight in my land?
and the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the
messengers of Jephthah because Israel took away my land when
they came up out of Egypt from Arnon even unto Jabbok and
unto Jordan now therefore restore those lands again
peaceably.
and Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the
children of Ammon
and said unto him thus saith Jephthah Israel took not away
the land of Moab nor the land of the children of Ammon
but when Israel came up from Egypt and walked through the
wilderness unto the red sea and came to Kadesh
then Israel sent messengers unto the king of Edom saying let
me I pray thee pass through thy land but the king of Edom
would not hearken thereto. and in like manner they sent unto
the king of Moab but he would not consent and Israel abode
in Kadesh.
then they went along through the wilderness and compassed the
land of Edom and the land of Moab and came by the east side
of the land of Moab and pitched on the other side of Arnon
but came not within the border of Moab for Arnon was the
border of Moab.
and Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites
the king of Heshbon and Israel said unto him let us pass we
pray thee through thy land into my place.
but Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast but
Sihon gathered all his people together and pitched in Jahaz
and fought against Israel.
and the lord God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people
into the hand of Israel and they smote them so Israel
possessed all the land of the Amorites the inhabitants of
that country.
and they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites from Arnon
even unto Jabbok and from the wilderness even unto Jordan.
so now the lord God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites
from before his people Israel and shouldest thou possess it?
wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy God giveth thee
to possess? so whomsoever the lord our God shall drive out
from before us them will we possess.
and now art thou any thing better than Balak the son of
Zippor king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel or
did he ever fight against them
while Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns and in Aroer and
her towns and in all the cities that be along by the coasts
of Arnon three hundred years? why therefore did ye not
recover them within that time?
wherefore I have not sinned against thee but thou doest me
wrong to war against me the lord the judge be judge this day
between the children of Israel and the children of Ammon.
howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto
the words of Jephthah which he sent him.
then the spirit of the lord came upon Jephthah and he passed
over Gilead and Manasseh and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead
and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of
Ammon.
and Jephthah vowed a vow unto the lord and said if thou
shalt without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine
hands
then it shall be that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of
my house to meet me when I return in peace from the children
of Ammon shall surely be the lord s and I will offer it up
for a burnt offering.
so Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight
against them and the lord delivered them into his hands.
and he smote them from Aroer even till thou come to Minnith
even twenty cities and unto the plain of the vineyards with
a very great slaughter. thus the children of Ammon were
subdued before the children of Israel.
and Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house and behold his
daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances
and she was his only child beside her he had Neither son nor
daughter.
and it came to pass when he saw her that he rent his
clothes and said alas my daughter thou hast brought me
very low and thou art one of them that trouble me for I have
opened my mouth unto the lord and I cannot go back.
and she said unto him my father if thou hast opened thy
mouth unto the lord do to me according to that which hath
proceeded out of thy mouth forasmuch as the lord hath taken
vengeance for thee of thine enemies even of the children of
Ammon.
and she said unto her father let this thing be done for me
let me alone two months that I may go up and down upon the
mountains and bewail my virginity I and my fellows.
and he said go. and he sent her away for two months and she
went with her companions and bewailed her virginity upon the
mountains.
and it came to pass at the end of two months that she
returned unto her father who did with her according to his
vow which he had vowed and she knew no man. and it was a
custom in Israel
that the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the
daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year.
and the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together and went
northward and said unto Jephthah wherefore passedst thou
over to fight against the children of Ammon and didst not
call us to go with thee? we will burn thine house upon thee
with fire.
and Jephthah said unto them I and my people were at great
strife with the children of Ammon and when I called you ye
delivered me not out of their hands.
and when I saw that ye delivered me not I put my life in my
hands and passed over against the children of Ammon and the
lord delivered them into my hand wherefore then are ye come
up unto me this day to fight against me?
then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead and
fought with Ephraim and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim
because they said ye Gileadites are fugitives of Ephraim
among the Ephraimites and among the Manassites.
and the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the
Ephraimites and it was so that when those Ephraimites which
were escaped said let me go over that the men of Gilead said
unto him art thou an Ephraimite? if he said nay
then said they unto him say now Shibboleth and he said
Sibboleth for he could not frame to pronounce it right. then
they took him and slew him at the passages of Jordan and
there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two
thousand.
and Jephthah judged Israel six years. then died Jephthah the
Gileadite and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.
and after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.
and he had thirty sons and thirty daughters whom he sent
abroad and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons.
and he judged Israel seven years.
then died Ibzan and was buried at Bethlehem.
and after him Elon a Zebulonite judged Israel and he judged
Israel Ten years.
and Elon the Zebulonite died and was buried in Aijalon in the
country of Zebulun.
and after him Abdon the son of Hillel a Pirathonite judged
Israel.
and he had forty sons and thirty nephews that rode on
threescore and Ten ass colts and he judged Israel eight
years.
and Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died and was
buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim in the mount of the
Amalekites.
and the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord and the lord delivered them into the hand of the
Philistines forty years.
and there was a certain man of Zorah of the family of the
Danites whose name was Manoah and his wife was barren and
bare not.
and the angel of the lord appeared unto the woman and said
unto her behold now thou art barren and bearest not but
thou shalt conceive and bear a son.
now therefore beware I pray thee and drink not wine nor
strong drink and eat not any unclean thing
for lo thou shalt conceive and bear a son and no razor
shall come on his head for the child shall be a Nazarite unto
God from the womb and he shall begin to deliver Israel out of
the hand of the Philistines.
then the woman came and told her husband saying a man of God
came unto me and his countenance was like the countenance of
an angel of God very terrible but I asked him not whence he
was Neither told he me his name
but he said unto me behold thou shalt conceive and bear a
son and now drink no wine nor strong drink Neither eat any
unclean thing for the child shall be a Nazarite to God from
the womb to the day of his death.
then Manoah intreated the lord and said O my lord let the
man of God which thou didst send come again unto us and teach
us what we shall do unto the child that shall be born.
and God hearkened to the voice of Manoah and the angel of God
came again unto the woman as she sat in the field but Manoah
her husband was not with her.
and the woman made haste and ran and shewed her husband and
said unto him behold the man hath appeared unto me that
came unto me the other day.
and Manoah arose and went after his wife and came to the
man and said unto him art thou the man that spakest unto the
woman? and he said I Am.
and Manoah said now let thy words come to pass. how shall we
order the child and how shall we do unto him?
and the angel of the lord said unto Manoah of all that I said
unto the woman let her beware.
she may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine Neither
let her drink wine or strong drink nor eat any unclean thing
all that I commanded her let her observe.
and Manoah said unto the angel of the lord I pray thee let
us detain thee until we shall have made ready a kid for thee.
and the angel of the lord said unto Manoah though thou detain
me I will not eat of thy bread and if thou wilt offer a
burnt offering thou must offer it unto the lord. for Manoah
knew not that he was an angel of the lord.
and Manoah said unto the angel of the lord what is thy name
that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour?
and the angel of the lord said unto him why askest thou thus
after my name seeing it is secret?
so Manoah took a kid with a meat offering and offered it upon
a rock unto the lord and the angel did wonderously and
Manoah and his wife looked on.
for it came to pass when the flame went up toward heaven from
off the altar that the angel of the lord ascended in the
flame of the altar. and Manoah and his wife looked on it and
fell on their faces to the ground.
but the angel of the lord did no more appear to Manoah and to
his wife. then Manoah knew that he was an angel of the lord.
and Manoah said unto his wife we shall surely die because we
have seen God.
but his wife said unto him if the lord were pleased to kill
us he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat
offering at our hands Neither would he have shewed us all
these things nor would as at this time have told us such
things as these.
and the woman bare a son and called his name Samson and the
child grew and the lord blessed him.
and the spirit of the lord began to move him at times in the
camp of Dan between Zorah and Eshtaol.
and Samson went down to Timnath and saw a woman in Timnath of
the daughters of the Philistines.
and he came up and told his father and his mother and said
I have seen a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the
Philistines now therefore get her for me to wife.
then his father and his mother said unto him is there never a
woman among the daughters of thy brethren or among all my
people that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised
Philistines? and Samson said unto his father get her for me
for she pleaseth me well.
but his father and his mother knew not that it was of the
lord that he sought an occasion against the Philistines for
at that time the Philistines had dominion over Israel.
then went Samson down and his father and his mother to
Timnath and came to the vineyards of Timnath and behold a
young lion roared against him.
and the spirit of the lord came mightily upon him and he rent
him as he would have rent a kid and he had nothing in his
hand but he told not his father or his mother what he had
done.
and he went down and talked with the woman and she pleased
Samson well.
and after a time he returned to take her and he turned aside
to see the carcase of the lion and behold there was a swarm
of bees and honey in the carcase of the lion.
and he took thereof in his hands and went on eating and came
to his father and mother and he gave them and they did eat
but he told not them that he had taken the honey out of the
carcase of the lion.
so his father went down unto the woman and Samson made there
a feast for so used the young men to do.
and it came to pass when they saw him that they brought
thirty companions to be with him.
and Samson said unto them I will now put forth a riddle unto
you if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days
of the feast and find it out then I will give you thirty
sheets and thirty change of garments
but if ye cannot declare it me then shall ye give me thirty
sheets and thirty change of garments. and they said unto him
put forth thy riddle that we may hear it.
and he said unto them out of the eater came forth meat and
out of the strong came forth sweetness. and they could not in
three days expound the riddle.
and it came to pass on the seventh day that they said unto
Samson s wife entice thy husband that he may declare unto us
the riddle lest we burn thee and thy father s house with
fire have ye called us to take that we have? is it not so?
and Samson s wife wept before him and said thou dost but
hate me and lovest me not thou hast put forth a riddle unto
the children of my people and hast not told it me. and he
said unto her behold I have not told it my father nor my
mother and shall I tell it thee?
and she wept before him the seven days while their feast
lasted and it came to pass on the seventh day that he told
her because she lay sore upon him and she told the riddle to
the children of her people.
and the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day
before the sun went down what is sweeter than honey? and what
is stronger than a lion? and he said unto them if ye had not
plowed with my heifer ye had not found out my riddle.
and the spirit of the lord came upon him and he went down to
Ashkelon and slew thirty men of them and took their spoil
and gave change of garments unto them which expounded the
riddle. and his anger was kindled and he went up to his
father s house.
but Samson s wife was given to his companion whom he had used
as his friend.
but it came to pass within a while after in the time of wheat
harvest that Samson visited his wife with a kid and he said
I will go in to my wife into the chamber. but her father would
not suffer him to go in.
and her father said I verily thought that thou hadst utterly
hated her therefore I gave her to thy companion is not her
younger sister fairer than she? take her I pray thee instead
of her.
and Samson said concerning them now shall I be more blameless
than the Philistines though I do them a displeasure.
and Samson went and caught three hundred foxes and took
firebrands and turned tail to tail and put a firebrand in
the midst between two tails.
and when he had set the brands on fire he let them go into
the standing corn of the Philistines and burnt up both the
shocks and also the standing corn with the vineyards and
olives.
then the Philistines said who hath done this? and they
answered Samson the son in law of the Timnite because he
had taken his wife and given her to his companion. and the
Philistines came up and burnt her and her father with fire.
and Samson said unto them though ye have done this yet will
I be avenged of you and after that I will cease.
and he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter and he
went down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam.
then the Philistines went up and pitched in Judah and spread
themselves in Lehi.
and the men of Judah said why are ye come up against us? and
they answered to bind Samson are we come up to do to him as
he hath done to us.
then three thousand men of Judah went to the top of the rock
Etam and said to Samson knowest thou not that the
Philistines are rulers over us? what is this that thou hast
done unto us? and he said unto them as they did unto me so
have I done unto them.
and they said unto him we are come down to bind thee that we
may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines. and Samson
said unto them swear unto me that ye will not fall upon me
yourselves.
and they spake unto him saying no but we will bind thee
fast and deliver thee into their hand but surely we will not
kill thee. and they bound him with two new cords and brought
him up from the rock.
and when he came unto Lehi the Philistines shouted against
him and the spirit of the lord came mightily upon him and
the cords that were upon his arms became as flax that was
burnt with fire and his Bands loosed from off his hands.
and he found a new jawbone of an ass and put forth his hand
and took it and slew a thousand men therewith.
and Samson said with the jawbone of an ass heaps upon heaps
with the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men.
and it came to pass when he had made an end of speaking that
he cast away the jawbone out of his hand and called that
place Ramathlehi.
and he was sore athirst and called on the lord and said
thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy
servant and now shall I die for thirst and fall into the
hand of the uncircumcised?
but God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw and there
came water thereout and when he had drunk his spirit came
again and he revived wherefore he called the name thereof
Enhakkore which is in Lehi unto this day.
and he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty
years.
then went Samson to Gaza and saw there an harlot and went in
unto her.
and it was told the Gazites saying Samson is come hither.
and they compassed him in and laid wait for him all night in
the gate of the city and were quiet all the night saying in
the morning when it is day we shall kill him.
and Samson lay till midnight and arose at midnight and took
the doors of the gate of the city and the two posts and went
away with them bar and all and put them upon his shoulders
and carried them up to the top of an hill that is before
Hebron.
and it came to pass afterward that he loved a woman in the
valley of Sorek whose name was Delilah.
and the lords of the Philistines came up unto her and said
unto her entice him and see wherein his great strength
lieth and by what means we may prevail against him that we
may bind him to afflict him and we will give thee every one
of us eleven hundred pieces of Silver.
and Delilah said to Samson tell me I pray thee wherein thy
great strength lieth and wherewith thou mightest be bound to
afflict thee.
and Samson said unto her if they bind me with seven green
withs that were never dried then shall I be weak and be as
another man.
then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven
green withs which had not been dried and she bound him with
them.
now there were men lying in wait abiding with her in the
chamber. and she said unto him the Philistines be upon thee
Samson. and he brake the withs as a thread of tow is broken
when it toucheth the fire. so his strength was not known.
and Delilah said unto Samson behold thou hast mocked me and
told me lies now tell me I pray thee wherewith thou
mightest be bound.
and he said unto her if they bind me fast with new ropes that
never were occupied then shall I be weak and be as another
man.
Delilah therefore took new ropes and bound him therewith and
said unto him the Philistines be upon thee Samson. and there
were liers in wait abiding in the chamber. and he brake them
from off his arms like a thread.
and Delilah said unto Samson hitherto thou hast mocked me
and told me lies tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound.
and he said unto her if thou weavest the seven locks of my
head with the web.
and she fastened it with the pin and said unto him the
Philistines be upon thee Samson. and he awaked out of his
sleep and went away with the pin of the beam and with the
web.
and she said unto him how canst thou say I love thee when
thine heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three
times and hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.
and it came to pass when she pressed him daily with her
words and urged him so that his soul was vexed unto death
that he told her all his heart and said unto her there hath
not come a razor upon mine head for I have been a Nazarite
unto God from my mother s womb if I be shaven then my
strength will go from me and I shall become weak and be like
any other man.
and when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart she
sent and called for the lords of the Philistines saying come
up this once for he hath shewed me all his heart. then the
lords of the Philistines came up unto her and brought money
in their hand.
and she made him sleep upon her knees and she called for a
man and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his
head and she began to afflict him and his strength went from
him.
and she said the Philistines be upon thee Samson. and he
awoke out of his sleep and said I will go out as at other
times before and shake myself. and he wist not that the lord
was departed from him.
but the Philistines took him and put out his eyes and
brought him down to Gaza and bound him with fetters of brass
and he did grind in the prison house.
howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was
shaven.
then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for
to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their God and to
rejoice for they said our God hath delivered Samson our
enemy into our hand.
and when the people saw him they praised their God for they
said our God hath delivered into our hands our enemy and the
destroyer of our country which slew many of us.
and it came to pass when their hearts were merry that they
said call for Samson that he may make us sport. and they
called for Samson out of the prison house and he made them
sport and they set him between the pillars.
and Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand suffer
me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth
that I may lean upon them.
now the house was full of men and women and all the lords of
the Philistines were there and there were upon the roof about
three thousand men and women that beheld while Samson made
sport.
and Samson called unto the lord and said O lord God
remember me I pray thee and strengthen me I pray thee only
this once O God that I may be at once avenged of the
Philistines for my two eyes.
and Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the
house stood and on which it was borne up of the one with his
right hand and of the other with his left.
and Samson said let me die with the Philistines. and he bowed
himself with all his might and the house fell upon the lords
and upon all the people that were therein. so the dead which
he slew at his death were more than they which he slew in his
life.
then his brethren and all the house of his father came down
and took him and brought him up and buried him between Zorah
and Eshtaol in the buryingplace of Manoah his father. and he
judged Israel twenty years.
and there was a man of mount Ephraim whose name was Micah.
and he said unto his mother the eleven hundred shekels of
Silver that were taken from thee about which thou cursedst
and spakest of also in mine ears behold the Silver is with
me I took it. and his mother said blessed be thou of the
lord my son.
and when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of Silver
to his mother his mother said I had wholly dedicated the
Silver unto the lord from my hand for my son to make a graven
image and a molten image now therefore I will restore it unto
thee.
yet he restored the money unto his mother and his mother took
two hundred shekels of Silver and gave them to the founder
who made thereof a graven image and a molten image and they
were in the house of Micah.
and the man Micah had an house of gods and made an Ephod and
teraphim and consecrated one of his sons who became his
priest.
in those days there was no king in Israel but every man did
that which was right in his own eyes.
and there was a young man out of Bethlehemjudah of the family
of Judah who was a Levite and he sojourned there.
and the man departed out of the city from Bethlehemjudah to
Sojourn where he could find a place and he came to mount
Ephraim to the house of Micah as he journeyed.
and Micah said unto him whence comest thou? and he said unto
him I Am a Levite of Bethlehemjudah and I go to Sojourn
where I may find a place.
and Micah said unto him dwell with me and be unto me a
father and a priest and I will give thee Ten shekels of
Silver by the year and a suit of apparel and thy victuals.
so the Levite went in.
and the Levite was content to dwell with the man and the
young man was unto him as one of his sons.
and Micah consecrated the Levite and the young man became his
priest and was in the house of Micah.
then said Micah now know I that the lord will do me good
seeing I have a Levite to my priest.
in those days there was no king in Israel and in those days
the tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell
in for unto that day all their inheritance had not fallen
unto them among the tribes of Israel.
and the children of Dan sent of their family five men from
their coasts men of valour from Zorah and from Eshtaol to
spy out the land and to search it and they said unto them
go search the land who when they came to mount Ephraim to
the house of Micah they lodged there.
when they were by the house of Micah they knew the voice of
the young man the Levite and they turned in thither and said
unto him who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in
this place? and what hast thou here?
and he said unto them thus and thus dealeth Micah with me
and hath hired me and I Am his priest.
and they said unto him ask counsel we pray thee of God
that we may know whether our way which we go shall be
prosperous.
and the priest said unto them go in peace before the lord is
your way wherein ye go.
then the five men departed and came to Laish and saw the
people that were therein how they dwelt careless after the
manner of the Zidonians quiet and secure and there was no
magistrate in the land that might put them to shame in any
thing and they were far from the Zidonians and had no
business with any man.
and they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol and
their brethren said unto them what say ye?
and they said Arise that we may go up against them for we
have seen the land and behold it is very good and are ye
still? be not slothful to go and to enter to possess the
land.
when ye go ye shall come unto a people secure and to a large
land for God hath given it into your hands a place where
there is no want of any thing that is in the earth.
and there went from thence of the family of the Danites out
of Zorah and out of Eshtaol six hundred men appointed with
weapons of war.
and they went up and pitched in Kirjathjearim in Judah
wherefore they called that place Mahanehdan unto this day
behold it is behind Kirjathjearim.
and they passed thence unto mount Ephraim and came unto the
house of Micah.
then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of
Laish and said unto their brethren do ye know that there is
in these houses an Ephod and teraphim and a graven image
and a molten image? now therefore consider what ye have to do.
and they turned thitherward and came to the house of the
young man the Levite even unto the house of Micah and
saluted him.
and the six hundred men appointed with their weapons of war
which were of the children of Dan stood by the entering of
the gate.
and the five men that went to spy out the land went up and
came in thither and took the graven image and the Ephod and
the teraphim and the molten image and the priest stood in
the entering of the gate with the six hundred men that were
appointed with weapons of war.
and these went into Micah s house and fetched the carved
image the Ephod and the teraphim and the molten image. then
said the priest unto them what do ye?
and they said unto him hold thy peace lay thine hand upon
thy mouth and go with us and be to us a father and a priest
is it better for thee to be a priest unto the house of one
man or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family in
Israel?
and the priest s heart was glad and he took the Ephod and
the teraphim and the graven image and went in the midst of
the people.
so they turned and departed and put the little ones and the
cattle and the carriage before them.
and when they were a good way from the house of Micah the men
that were in the houses near to Micah s house were gathered
together and overtook the children of Dan.
and they cried unto the children of Dan. and they turned their
faces and said unto Micah what aileth thee that thou comest
with such a company?
and he said ye have taken away my gods which I made and the
priest and ye are gone away and what have I more? and what
is this that ye say unto me what aileth thee?
and the children of Dan said unto him let not thy voice be
heard among us lest angry fellows run upon thee and thou
lose thy life with the lives of thy household.
and the children of Dan went their way and when Micah saw
that they were too strong for him he turned and went back
unto his house.
and they took the things which Micah had made and the priest
which he had and came unto Laish unto a people that were at
quiet and secure and they smote them with the edge of the
sword and burnt the city with fire.
and there was no deliverer because it was far from Zidon and
they had no business with any man and it was in the valley
that lieth by Bethrehob. and they built a city and dwelt
therein.
and they called the name of the city Dan after the name of
Dan their father who was born unto Israel howbeit the name
of the city was Laish at the first.
and the children of Dan set up the graven image and Jonathan
the son of Gershom the son of Manasseh he and his sons were
priests to the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of
the land.
and they set them up Micah s graven image which he made all
the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.
and it came to pass in those days when there was no king in
Israel that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side
of mount Ephraim who took to him a concubine out of
Bethlehemjudah.
and his concubine played the whore against him and went away
from him unto her father s house to Bethlehemjudah and was
there four whole months.
and her husband arose and went after her to speak friendly
unto her and to bring her again having his servant with him
and a couple of asses and she brought him into her father s
house and when the father of the damsel saw him he rejoiced
to meet him.
and his father in law the damsel s father retained him and
he abode with him three days so they did eat and drink and
lodged there.
and it came to pass on the fourth day when they arose early
in the morning that he rose up to depart and the damsel s
father said unto his son in law comfort thine heart with a
morsel of bread and afterward go your way.
and they sat down and did eat and drink both of them
together for the damsel s father had said unto the man be
content I pray thee and tarry all night and let thine heart
be merry.
and when the man rose up to depart his father in law urged
him therefore he lodged there again.
and he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart
and the damsel s father said comfort thine heart I pray
thee. and they tarried until afternoon and they did eat both
of them.
and when the man rose up to depart he and his concubine and
his servant his father in law the damsel s father said unto
him behold now the day draweth toward evening I pray you
tarry all night behold the day groweth to an end lodge
here that thine heart may be merry and to morrow get you
early on your way that thou mayest go home.
but the man would not tarry that night but he rose up and
departed and came over against Jebus which is Jerusalem and
there were with him two asses saddled his concubine also was
with him.
and when they were by Jebus the day was far spent and the
servant said unto his Master come I pray thee and let us
turn in into this city of the Jebusites and lodge in it.
and his Master said unto him we will not turn aside hither
into the city of a stranger that is not of the children of
Israel we will pass over to Gibeah.
and he said unto his servant come and let us draw near to
one of these places to lodge all night in Gibeah or in
Ramah.
and they passed on and went their way and the sun went down
upon them when they were by Gibeah which belongeth to
Benjamin.
and they turned aside thither to go in and to lodge in
Gibeah and when he went in he sat him down in a street of
the city for there was no man that took them into his house
to lodging.
and behold there came an old man from his work out of the
field at even which was also of mount Ephraim and he
sojourned in Gibeah but the men of the place were Benjamites.
and when he had lifted up his eyes he saw a wayfaring man in
the street of the city and the old man said whither goest
thou? and whence comest thou?
and he said unto him we are passing from Bethlehemjudah
toward the side of mount Ephraim from thence Am I and I went
to Bethlehemjudah but I Am now going to the house of the
lord and there is no man that receiveth me to house.
yet there is both straw and provender for our asses and there
is bread and wine also for me and for thy handmaid and for
the young man which is with thy servants there is no want of
any thing.
and the old man said peace be with thee howsoever let all
thy wants lie upon me only lodge not in the street.
so he brought him into his house and gave provender unto the
asses and they washed their feet and did eat and drink.
now as they were making their hearts merry behold the men of
the city certain sons of Belial beset the house round about
and beat at the door and spake to the Master of the house
the old man saying bring forth the man that came into thine
house that we may know him.
and the man the Master of the house went out unto them and
said unto them nay my brethren nay I pray you do not so
wickedly seeing that this man is come into mine house do not
this folly.
behold here is my daughter a maiden and his concubine them
I will bring out now and humble ye them and do with them
what seemeth good unto you but unto this man do not so vile a
thing.
but the men would not hearken to him so the man took his
concubine and brought her forth unto them and they knew her
and abused her all the night until the morning and when the
day began to spring they let her go.
then came the woman in the dawning of the day and fell down
at the door of the man s house where her lord was till it was
light.
and her lord rose up in the morning and opened the doors of
the house and went out to go his way and behold the woman
his concubine was fallen down at the door of the house and
her hands were upon the threshold.
and he said unto her up and let us be going. but none
answered. then the man took her up upon an ass and the man
rose up and gat him unto his place.
and when he was come into his house he took a knife and laid
hold on his concubine and divided her together with her
bones into twelve pieces and sent her into all the coasts of
Israel.
and it was so that all that saw it said there was no such
deed done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel
came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day consider of
it take advice and speak your minds.
then all the children of Israel went out and the congregation
was gathered together as one man from Dan even to Beersheba
with the land of Gilead unto the lord in Mizpeh.
and the chief of all the people even of all the tribes of
Israel presented themselves in the assembly of the people of
God four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.
 now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of
Israel were gone up to Mizpeh. then said the children of
Israel tell us how was this wickedness?
and the Levite the husband of the woman that was slain
answered and said I came into Gibeah that belongeth to
Benjamin I and my concubine to lodge.
and the men of Gibeah rose against me and beset the house
round about upon me by night and thought to have slain me
and my concubine have they forced that she is dead.
and I took my concubine and cut her in pieces and sent her
throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel for
they have committed lewdness and folly in Israel.
behold ye are all children of Israel give here your advice
and counsel.
and all the people arose as one man saying we will not any
of us go to his tent Neither will we any of us turn into his
house.
but now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah we
will go up by Lot against it
and we will take Ten men of an hundred throughout all the
tribes of Israel and an hundred of a thousand and a thousand
out of Ten thousand to fetch victual for the people that
they may do when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin according
to all the folly that they have wrought in Israel.
so all the men of Israel were gathered against the city knit
together as one man.
and the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of
Benjamin saying what wickedness is this that is done among
you?
now therefore deliver us the men the children of Belial
which are in Gibeah that we may put them to death and put
away evil from Israel. but the children of Benjamin would not
hearken to the voice of their brethren the children of Israel.
but the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out
of the cities unto Gibeah to go out to battle against the
children of Israel.
and the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of
the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword beside
the inhabitants of Gibeah which were numbered seven hundred
chosen men.
among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men
lefthanded every one could sling stones at an hair breadth
and not miss.
and the men of Israel beside Benjamin were numbered four
hundred thousand men that drew sword all these were men of
war.
and the children of Israel arose and went up to the house of
God and asked counsel of God and said which of us shall go
up first to the battle against the children of Benjamin? and
the lord said Judah shall go up first.
and the children of Israel rose up in the morning and
encamped against Gibeah.
and the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin and
the men of Israel put themselves in array to fight against
them at Gibeah.
and the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah and
destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty
and two thousand men.
and the people the men of Israel encouraged themselves and
set their battle again in array in the place where they put
themselves in array the first day.
 and the children of Israel went up and wept before the lord
until even and asked counsel of the lord saying shall I go
up again to battle against the children of Benjamin my
brother? and the lord said go up against him.
and the children of Israel came near against the children of
Benjamin the second day.
and Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second
day and destroyed down to the ground of the children of
Israel again eighteen thousand men all these drew the sword.
then all the children of Israel and all the people went up
and came unto the house of God and wept and sat there before
the lord and fasted that day until even and offered burnt
offerings and peace offerings before the lord.
and the children of Israel enquired of the lord for the ark
of the covenant of God was there in those days
and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron stood
before it in those days saying shall I yet again go out to
battle against the children of Benjamin my brother or shall I
cease? and the lord said go up for to morrow I will deliver
them into thine hand.
and Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah.
and the children of Israel went up against the children of
Benjamin on the third day and put themselves in array against
Gibeah as at other times.
and the children of Benjamin went out against the people and
were drawn away from the city and they began to smite of the
people and kill as at other times in the highways of which
one goeth up to the house of God and the other to Gibeah in
the field about thirty men of Israel.
and the children of Benjamin said they are smitten down
before us as at the first. but the children of Israel said
let us flee and draw them from the city unto the highways.
and all the men of Israel rose up out of their place and put
themselves in array at Baaltamar and the liers in wait of
Israel came forth out of their places even out of the meadows
of Gibeah.
and there came against Gibeah Ten thousand chosen men out of
all Israel and the battle was sore but they knew not that
evil was near them.
and the lord smote Benjamin before Israel and the children of
Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five
thousand and an hundred men all these drew the sword.
so the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten for
the men of Israel gave place to the Benjamites because they
trusted unto the liers in wait which they had set beside
Gibeah.
and the liers in wait hasted and rushed upon Gibeah and the
liers in wait drew themselves along and smote all the city
with the edge of the sword.
now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and
the liers in wait that they should make a great flame with
smoke rise up out of the city.
and when the men of Israel retired in the battle Benjamin
began to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty
persons for they said surely they are smitten down before
us as in the first battle.
but when the flame began to Arise up out of the city with a
pillar of smoke the Benjamites looked behind them and
behold the flame of the city ascended up to heaven.
and when the men of Israel turned again the men of Benjamin
were amazed for they saw that evil was come upon them.
therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel
unto the way of the wilderness but the battle overtook them
and them which came out of the cities they destroyed in the
midst of them.
thus they inclosed the Benjamites round about and chased
them and trode them down with ease over against Gibeah toward
the sunrising.
and there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men all these
were men of valour.
and they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock
of Rimmon and they gleaned of them in the highways five
thousand men and pursued hard after them unto Gidom and slew
two thousand men of them.
so that all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and
five thousand men that drew the sword all these were men of
valour.
but six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderness unto the
rock Rimmon and abode in the rock Rimmon four months.
and the men of Israel turned again upon the children of
Benjamin and smote them with the edge of the sword as well
the men of every city as the beast and all that came to
hand also they set on fire all the cities that they came to.
now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh saying there shall
not any of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife.
and the people came to the house of God and abode there till
even before God and lifted up their voices and wept sore
and said O lord God of Israel why is this come to pass in
Israel that there should be to day one tribe lacking in
Israel?
and it came to pass on the morrow that the people rose early
and built there an altar and offered burnt offerings and
peace offerings.
and the children of Israel said who is there among all the
tribes of Israel that came not up with the congregation unto
the lord? for they had made a great oath concerning him that
came not up to the lord to Mizpeh saying he shall surely be
put to death.
and the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their
brother and said there is one tribe cut off from Israel this
day.
how shall we do for wives for them that remain seeing we have
sworn by the lord that we will not give them of our daughters
to wives?
and they said what one is there of the tribes of Israel that
came not up to Mizpeh to the lord? and behold there came
none to the camp from Jabeshgilead to the assembly.
for the people were numbered and behold there were none of
the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead there.
and the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the
valiantest and commanded them saying go and smite the
inhabitants of Jabeshgilead with the edge of the sword with
the women and the children.
and this is the thing that ye shall do ye shall utterly
destroy every Male and every woman that hath lain by man.
and they found among the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead four
hundred young virgins that had known no man by lying with any
Male and they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh which is
in the land of Canaan.
and the whole congregation sent some to speak to the children
of Benjamin that were in the rock Rimmon and to call
peaceably unto them.
and Benjamin came again at that time and they gave them wives
which they had saved alive of the women of Jabeshgilead and
yet so they sufficed them not.
and the people repented them for Benjamin because that the
lord had made a breach in the tribes of Israel.
then the elders of the congregation said how shall we do for
wives for them that remain seeing the women are destroyed out
of Benjamin?
and they said there must be an inheritance for them that be
escaped of Benjamin that a tribe be not destroyed out of
Israel.
howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters for the
children of Israel have sworn saying cursed be he that
giveth a wife to Benjamin.
then they said behold there is a feast of the lord in Shiloh
yearly in a place which is on the north side of Bethel on the
east side of the highway that goeth up from Bethel to Shechem
and on the south of Lebonah.
therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin saying go
and lie in wait in the vineyards
and see and behold if the daughters of Shiloh come out to
dance in dances then come ye out of the vineyards and catch
you every man his wife of the daughters of Shiloh and go to
the land of Benjamin.
and it shall be when their fathers or their brethren come
unto us to complain that we will say unto them be favourable
unto them for our sakes because we reserved not to each man
his wife in the war for ye did not give unto them at this
time that ye should be guilty.
and the children of Benjamin did so and took them wives
according to their number of them that danced whom they
caught and they went and returned unto their inheritance and
repaired the cities and dwelt in them.
and the children of Israel departed thence at that time every
man to his tribe and to his family and they went out from
thence every man to his inheritance.
in those days there was no king in Israel every man did that
which was right in his own eyes.
now it came to pass in the days when the judges ruled that
there was a famine in the land. and a certain man of
Bethlehemjudah went to Sojourn in the country of Moab he and
his wife and his two sons.
and the name of the man was Elimelech and the name of his
wife Naomi and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion
Ephrathites of Bethlehemjudah. and they came into the country
of Moab and continued there.
and Elimelech Naomi s husband died and she was left and her
two sons.
and they took them wives of the women of Moab the name of the
one was Orpah and the name of the other Ruth and they
dwelled there about Ten years.
and Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them and the woman
was left of her two sons and her husband.
then she arose with her daughters in law that she might
return from the country of Moab for she had heard in the
country of Moab how that the lord had visited his people in
giving them bread.
wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was and
her two daughters in law with her and they went on the way to
return unto the land of Judah.
and Naomi said unto her two daughters in law go return each
to her mother s house the lord deal kindly with you as ye
have dealt with the dead and with me.
the lord grant you that ye may find rest each of you in the
house of her husband. then she kissed them and they lifted up
their voice and wept.
and they said unto her surely we will return with thee unto
thy people.
and Naomi said turn again my daughters why will ye go with
me? are there yet any more sons in my womb that they may be
your husbands?
turn again my daughters go your way for I Am too old to
have an husband. if I should say I have hope if I should
have an husband also to night and should also bear sons
would ye tarry for them till they were grown? would ye stay
for them from having husbands? nay my daughters for it
grieveth me Much for your sakes that the hand of the lord is
gone out against me.
and they lifted up their voice and wept again and Orpah
kissed her mother in law but Ruth clave unto her.
and she said behold thy sister in law is gone back unto her
people and unto her gods return thou after thy sister in
law.
and Ruth said intreat me not to leave thee or to return from
following after thee for whither thou goest I will go and
where thou lodgest I will lodge thy people shall be my
people and thy God my God
where thou diest will I die and there will I be buried the
lord do so to me and more also if ought but death part thee
and me.
when she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her
then she left speaking unto her.
so they two went until they came to Bethlehem. and it came to
pass when they were come to Bethlehem that all the city was
moved about them and they said is this Naomi?
and she said unto them call me not Naomi call me Mara for
the almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me.
I went out full and the lord hath brought me home again empty
why then call ye me Naomi seeing the lord hath testified
against me and the almighty hath afflicted me?
so Naomi returned and Ruth the Moabitess her daughter in
law with her which returned out of the country of Moab and
they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of barley harvest.
and Naomi had a kinsman of her husband s a Mighty man of
wealth of the family of Elimelech and his name was Boaz.
and Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi let me now go to the
field and glean ears of corn after him in whose sight I shall
find grace. and she said unto her go my daughter.
and she went and came and gleaned in the field after the
reapers and her hap was to light on a part of the field
belonging unto Boaz who was of the kindred of Elimelech.
and behold Boaz came from Bethlehem and said unto the
reapers the lord be with you. and they answered him the lord
bless thee.
then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers
whose damsel is this?
and the servant that was set over the reapers answered and
said it is the Moabitish damsel that came back with Naomi out
of the country of Moab
and she said I pray you let me glean and gather after the
reapers among the sheaves so she came and hath continued
even from the morning until now that she tarried a little in
the house.
then said Boaz unto Ruth hearest thou not my daughter? go
not to glean in another field Neither go from hence but
abide here fast by my maidens
let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap and go thou
after them have I not charged the young men that they shall
not touch thee? and when thou art athirst go unto the
vessels and drink of that which the young men have drawn.
then she fell on her face and bowed herself to the ground
and said unto him why have I found grace in thine eyes that
thou shouldest take knowledge of me seeing I Am a stranger?
and Boaz answered and said unto her it hath fully been shewed
me all that thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the
death of thine husband and how thou hast left thy father and
thy mother and the land of thy nativity and art come unto a
people which thou knewest not heretofore.
the lord recompense thy work and a full reward be given thee
of the lord God of Israel under whose wings thou art come to
trust.
then she said let me find favour in thy sight my lord for
that thou hast comforted me and for that thou hast spoken
friendly unto thine handmaid though I be not like unto one of
thine handmaidens.
and Boaz said unto her at mealtime come thou hither and eat
of the bread and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. and she sat
beside the reapers and he reached her parched corn and she
did eat and was sufficed and left.
and when she was risen up to glean Boaz commanded his young
men saying let her glean even among the sheaves and
reproach her not
and let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her and
leave them that she may glean them and rebuke her not.
so she gleaned in the field until even and beat out that she
had gleaned and it was about an Ephah of barley.
and she took it up and went into the city and her mother in
law saw what she had gleaned and she brought forth and gave
to her that she had reserved after she was sufficed.
and her mother in law said unto her where hast thou gleaned
to day? and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take
knowledge of thee. and she shewed her mother in law with whom
she had wrought and said the man s name with whom I wrought
to day is Boaz.
and Naomi said unto her daughter in law blessed be he of the
lord who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to
the dead. and Naomi said unto her the man is near of kin unto
us one of our next kinsmen.
and Ruth the Moabitess said he said unto me also thou shalt
keep fast by my young men until they have ended all my
harvest.
and Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law it is good my
daughter that thou go out with his maidens that they meet
thee not in any other field.
so she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the end
of barley harvest and of wheat harvest and dwelt with her
mother in law.
then Naomi her mother in law said unto her my daughter shall
I not seek rest for thee that it may be well with thee?
and now is not Boaz of our kindred with whose maidens thou
wast? behold he winnoweth barley to night in the
threshingfloor.
wash thyself therefore and anoint thee and put thy raiment
upon thee and get thee down to the floor but make not
thyself known unto the man until he shall have done eating
and drinking.
and it shall be when he lieth down that thou shalt Mark the
place where he shall lie and thou shalt go in and uncover
his feet and lay thee down and he will tell thee what thou
shalt do.
and she said unto her all that thou sayest unto me I will do.
and she went down unto the floor and did according to all
that her mother in law bade her.
and when Boaz had eaten and drunk and his heart was merry he
went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn and she came
softly and uncovered his feet and laid her down.
and it came to pass at midnight that the man was afraid and
turned himself and behold a woman lay at his feet.
and he said who art thou? and she answered I Am Ruth thine
handmaid spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid for
thou art a near kinsman.
and he said blessed be thou of the lord my daughter for
thou hast shewed more kindness in the latter end than at the
beginning inasmuch as thou followedst not young men whether
poor or rich.
and now my daughter fear not I will do to thee all that
thou requirest for all the city of my people doth know that
thou art a virtuous woman.
and now it is true that I Am thy near kinsman howbeit there
is a kinsman nearer than I.
tarry this night and it shall be in the morning that if he
will perform unto thee the part of a kinsman well let him do
the kinsman s part but if he will not do the part of a
kinsman to thee then will I do the part of a kinsman to thee
as the lord liveth lie down until the morning.
and she lay at his feet until the morning and she rose up
before one could know another. and he said let it not be
known that a woman came into the floor.
also he said bring the vail that thou hast upon thee and
hold it. and when she held it he measured six measures of
barley and laid it on her and she went into the city.
and when she came to her mother in law she said who art
thou my daughter? and she told her all that the man had done
to her.
and she said these six measures of barley gave he me for he
said to me go not empty unto thy mother in law.
then said she sit still my daughter until thou know how the
matter will fall for the man will not be in rest until he
have finished the thing this day.
then went Boaz up to the gate and sat him down there and
behold the kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by unto whom he
said ho such a one turn aside sit down here. and he turned
aside and sat down.
and he took Ten men of the elders of the city and said sit
ye down here. and they sat down.
and he said unto the kinsman Naomi that is come again out of
the country of Moab selleth a parcel of land which was our
brother Elimelech s
and I thought to advertise thee saying buy it before the
inhabitants and before the elders of my people. if thou wilt
redeem it redeem it but if thou wilt not redeem it then
tell me that I may know for there is none to redeem it
beside thee and I Am after thee. and he said I will redeem
it.
then said Boaz what day thou buyest the field of the hand of
Naomi thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess the wife
of the dead to raise up the name of the dead upon his
inheritance.
and the kinsman said I cannot redeem it for myself lest I
mar mine own inheritance redeem thou my right to thyself for
I cannot redeem it.
now this was the manner in former time in Israel concerning
redeeming and concerning changing for to confirm all things
a man plucked off his shoe and gave it to his neighbour and
this was a testimony in Israel.
therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz buy it for thee. so he
drew off his shoe.
and Boaz said unto the elders and unto all the people ye are
witnesses this day that I have bought all that was
Elimelech s and all that was Chilion s and Mahlon s of the
hand of Naomi.
moreover Ruth the Moabitess the wife of Mahlon have I
purchased to be my wife to raise up the name of the dead upon
his inheritance that the name of the dead be not cut off from
among his brethren and from the gate of his place ye are
witnesses this day.
and all the people that were in the gate and the elders
said we are witnesses. the lord make the woman that is come
into thine house like Rachel and like Leah which two did
build the house of Israel and do thou worthily in Ephratah
and be famous in Bethlehem
and let thy house be like the house of Pharez whom Tamar bare
unto Judah of the seed which the lord shall give thee of this
young woman.
so Boaz took Ruth and she was his wife and when he went in
unto her the lord gave her conception and she bare a son.
and the women said unto Naomi blessed be the lord which hath
not left thee this day without a kinsman that his name may be
famous in Israel.
and he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life and a
nourisher of thine old age for thy daughter in law which
loveth thee which is better to thee than seven sons hath
born him.
and Naomi took the child and laid it in her bosom and became
nurse unto it.
and the women her neighbours gave it a name saying there is
a son born to Naomi and they called his name Obed he is the
father of Jesse the father of David.
now these are the generations of Pharez Pharez begat Hezron
and Hezron begat Ram and Ram begat Amminadab
and Amminadab begat Nahshon and Nahshon begat Salmon
and Salmon begat Boaz and Boaz begat Obed
and Obed begat Jesse and Jesse begat David.
now there was a certain man of Ramathaimzophim of mount
Ephraim and his name was Elkanah the son of Jeroham the son
of Elihu the son of Tohu the son of Zuph an Ephrathite
and he had two wives the name of the one was Hannah and the
name of the other Peninnah and Peninnah had children but
Hannah had no children.
and this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to
sacrifice unto the lord of hosts in Shiloh. and the two sons
of Eli Hophni and Phinehas the priests of the lord were
there.
and when the time was that Elkanah offered he gave to
Peninnah his wife and to all her sons and her daughters
portions
but unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion for he loved Hannah
but the lord had shut up her womb.
and her adversary also provoked her sore for to make her
fret because the lord had shut up her womb.
and as he did so year by year when she went up to the house
of the lord so she provoked her therefore she wept and did
not eat.
then said Elkanah her husband to her Hannah why weepest
thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved?
Am not I better to thee than Ten sons?
so Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh and after
they had drunk. now Eli the priest sat upon a seat by a post
of the temple of the lord.
and she was in bitterness of soul and prayed unto the lord
and wept sore.
and she vowed a vow and said O lord of hosts if thou wilt
indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid and remember
me and not forget thine handmaid but wilt give unto thine
handmaid a man child then I will give him unto the lord all
the days of his life and there shall no razor come upon his
head.
and it came to pass as she continued praying before the lord
that Eli marked her mouth.
now Hannah she spake in her heart only her lips moved but
her voice was not heard therefore Eli thought she had been
drunken.
and Eli said unto her how long wilt thou be drunken? put away
thy wine from thee.
and Hannah answered and said no my lord I Am a woman of a
sorrowful spirit I have drunk Neither wine nor strong drink
but have poured out my soul before the lord.
count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial for out of
the abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken
hitherto.
then Eli answered and said go in peace and the God of Israel
grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him.
and she said let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. so
the woman went her way and did eat and her countenance was
no more sad.
and they rose up in the morning early and worshipped before
the lord and returned and came to their house to Ramah and
Elkanah knew Hannah his wife and the lord remembered her.
wherefore it came to pass when the time was come about after
Hannah had conceived that she bare a son and called his name
Samuel saying because I have asked him of the lord.
and the man Elkanah and all his house went up to offer unto
the lord the yearly sacrifice and his vow.
but Hannah went not up for she said unto her husband I will
not go up until the child be weaned and then I will bring
him that he may appear before the lord and there abide for
ever.
and Elkanah her husband said unto her do what seemeth thee
good tarry until thou have weaned him only the lord
establish his word. so the woman abode and gave her son suck
until she weaned him.
and when she had weaned him she took him up with her with
three bullocks and one Ephah of flour and a bottle of wine
and brought him unto the house of the lord in Shiloh and the
child was young.
and they slew a bullock and brought the child to Eli.
and she said oh my lord as thy soul liveth my lord I Am
the woman that stood by thee here praying unto the lord.
for this child I prayed and the lord hath given me my
petition which I asked of him
therefore also I have lent him to the lord as long as he
liveth he shall be lent to the lord. and he worshipped the
lord there.
and Hannah prayed and said my heart rejoiceth in the lord
mine horn is exalted in the lord my mouth is enlarged over
mine enemies because I rejoice in thy salvation.
there is none holy as the lord for there is none beside thee
Neither is there any rock like our God.
talk no more so exceeding proudly let not arrogancy come out
of your mouth for the lord is a God of knowledge and by him
actions are weighed.
the bows of the Mighty men are broken and they that stumbled
are girded with strength.
they that were full have hired out themselves for bread and
they that were hungry ceased so that the barren hath born
seven and she that hath many children is waxed feeble.
the lord killeth and maketh alive he bringeth down to the
grave and bringeth up.
the lord maketh poor and maketh rich he bringeth low and
lifteth up.
he raiseth up the poor out of the dust and lifteth up the
beggar from the dunghill to set them among princes and to
make them inherit the throne of glory for the pillars of the
earth are the lord s and he hath set the world upon them.
he will keep the feet of his saints and the wicked shall be
silent in darkness for by strength shall no man prevail.
the adversaries of the lord shall be broken to pieces out of
heaven shall he thunder upon them the lord shall judge the
ends of the earth and he shall give strength unto his king
and exalt the horn of his anointed.
and Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. and the child did
minister unto the lord before Eli the priest.
now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial they knew not the
lord.
and the priest s custom with the people was that when any
man offered sacrifice the priest s servant came while the
flesh was in seething with a fleshhook of three teeth in his
hand
and he struck it into the pan or kettle or caldron or pot
all that the fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself.
so they did in Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came
thither.
also before they burnt the fat the priest s servant came and
said to the man that sacrificed give flesh to roast for the
priest for he will not have sodden flesh of thee but raw.
and if any man said unto him let them not fail to burn the
fat presently and then take as Much as thy soul desireth
then he would answer him nay but thou shalt give it me now
and if not I will take it by force.
wherefore the Sin of the young men was very great before the
lord for men abhorred the offering of the lord.
but Samuel ministered before the lord being a child girded
with a linen Ephod.
moreover his mother made him a little coat and brought it to
him from year to year when she came up with her husband to
offer the yearly sacrifice.
and Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife and said the lord give
thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the
lord. and they went unto their own home.
and the lord visited Hannah so that she conceived and bare
three sons and two daughters. and the child Samuel grew before
the lord.
now Eli was very old and heard all that his sons did unto all
Israel and how they lay with the women that assembled at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
and he said unto them why do ye such things? for I hear of
your evil dealings by all this people.
nay my sons for it is no good report that I hear ye make
the lord s people to transgress.
if one man Sin against another the judge shall judge him but
if a man Sin against the lord who shall intreat for him?
notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their
father because the lord would slay them.
and the child Samuel grew on and was in favour both with the
lord and also with men.
and there came a man of God unto Eli and said unto him thus
saith the lord did I plainly appear unto the house of thy
father when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh s house?
and did I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my
priest to offer upon mine altar to burn incense to wear an
Ephod before me? and did I give unto the house of thy father
all the offerings made by fire of the children of Israel?
wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at mine offering which
I have commanded in my habitation and honourest thy sons
above me to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the
offerings of Israel my people?
wherefore the lord God of Israel saith I said indeed that thy
house and the house of thy father should walk before me for
ever but now the lord saith be it far from me for them that
honour me I will honour and they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed.
behold the days come that I will cut off thine arm and the
arm of thy father s house that there shall not be an old man
in thine house.
and thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation in all the
wealth which God shall give Israel and there shall not be an
old man in thine house for ever.
and the man of thine whom I shall not cut off from mine
altar shall be to consume thine eyes and to grieve thine
heart and all the increase of thine house shall die in the
flower of their age.
and this shall be a sign unto thee that shall come upon thy
two sons on Hophni and Phinehas in one day they shall die
both of them.
and I will raise me up a faithful priest that shall do
according to that which is in mine heart and in my mind and I
will build him a sure house and he shall walk before mine
anointed for ever.
and it shall come to pass that every one that is left in
thine house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of Silver
and a morsel of bread and shall say put me I pray thee
into one of the priests offices that I may eat a piece of
bread.
and the child Samuel ministered unto the lord before Eli. and
the word of the lord was precious in those days there was no
open vision.
and it came to pass at that time when Eli was laid down in
his place and his eyes began to wax dim that he could not
see
and ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the lord
where the ark of God was and Samuel was laid down to sleep
that the lord called Samuel and he answered here Am I.
and he ran unto Eli and said here Am I for thou calledst
me. and he said I called not lie down again. and he went and
lay down.
and the lord called yet again Samuel. and Samuel arose and
went to Eli and said here Am I for thou didst call me. and
he answered I called not my son lie down again.
now Samuel did not yet know the lord Neither was the word of
the lord yet revealed unto him.
and the lord called Samuel again the third time. and he arose
and went to Eli and said here Am I for thou didst call me.
and Eli perceived that the lord had called the child.
therefore Eli said unto Samuel go lie down and it shall be
if he call thee that thou shalt say speak lord for thy
servant heareth. so Samuel went and lay down in his place.
and the lord came and stood and called as at other times
Samuel Samuel. then Samuel answered speak for thy servant
heareth.
and the lord said to Samuel behold I will do a thing in
Israel at which both the ears of every one that heareth it
shall tingle.
in that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have
spoken concerning his house when I begin I will also make an
end.
for I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for
the iniquity which he knoweth because his sons made
themselves vile and he restrained them not.
and therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli that the
iniquity of Eli s house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever.
and Samuel lay until the morning and opened the doors of the
house of the lord. and Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision.
then Eli called Samuel and said Samuel my son. and he
answered here Am I.
and he said what is the thing that the lord hath said unto
thee? I pray thee hide it not from me God do so to thee and
more also if thou hide any thing from me of all the things
that he said unto thee.
and Samuel told him every whit and hid nothing from him. and
he said it is the lord let him do what seemeth him good.
and Samuel grew and the lord was with him and did let none
of his words fall to the ground.
and all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was
established to be a prophet of the lord.
and the lord appeared again in Shiloh for the lord revealed
himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the lord.
and the word of Samuel came to all Israel. now Israel went out
against the Philistines to battle and pitched beside
Ebenezer and the Philistines pitched in Aphek.
and the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel
and when they joined battle Israel was smitten before the
Philistines and they slew of the army in the field about four
thousand men.
and when the people were come into the camp the elders of
Israel said wherefore hath the lord smitten us to day before
the Philistines? let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the
lord out of Shiloh unto us that when it cometh among us it
may save us out of the hand of our enemies.
so the people sent to Shiloh that they might bring from
thence the ark of the covenant of the lord of hosts which
dwelleth between the Cherubims and the two sons of Eli
Hophni and Phinehas were there with the ark of the covenant
of God.
and when the ark of the covenant of the lord came into the
camp all Israel shouted with a great shout so that the earth
rang again.
and when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout they
said what meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp
of the Hebrews? and they understood that the ark of the lord
was come into the camp.
and the Philistines were afraid for they said God is come
into the camp. and they said woe unto us for there hath not
been such a thing heretofore.
woe unto us who shall deliver us out of the hand of these
Mighty gods? these are the gods that smote the Egyptians with
all the plagues in the wilderness.
be strong and quit yourselves like men O ye Philistines that
ye be not servants unto the Hebrews as they have been to you
quit yourselves like men and fight.
and the Philistines fought and Israel was smitten and they
fled every man into his tent and there was a very great
slaughter for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.
and the ark of God was taken and the two sons of Eli Hophni
and Phinehas were slain.
and there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army and came to
Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent and with earth upon
his head.
and when he came lo Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside
watching for his heart trembled for the ark of God. and when
the man came into the city and told it all the city cried
out.
and when Eli heard the noise of the crying he said what
meaneth the noise of this tumult? and the man came in hastily
and told Eli.
now Eli was ninety and eight years old and his eyes were dim
that he could not see.
and the man said unto Eli I Am he that came out of the army
and I fled to day out of the army. and he said what is there
done my son?
and the messenger answered and said Israel is fled before the
Philistines and there hath been also a great slaughter among
the people and thy two sons also Hophni and Phinehas are
dead and the ark of God is taken.
and it came to pass when he made mention of the ark of God
that he fell from off the seat backward by the side of the
gate and his neck brake and he died for he was an old man
and heavy. and he had judged Israel forty years.
and his daughter in law Phinehas wife was with child near
to be delivered and when she heard the tidings that the ark
of God was taken and that her father in law and her husband
were dead she bowed herself and travailed for her pains came
upon her.
and about the time of her death the women that stood by her
said unto her fear not for thou hast born a son. but she
answered not Neither did she regard it.
and she named the child Ichabod saying the glory is departed
from Israel because the ark of God was taken and because of
her father in law and her husband.
and she said the glory is departed from Israel for the ark
of God is taken.
and the Philistines took the ark of God and brought it from
Ebenezer unto Ashdod.
when the Philistines took the ark of God they brought it into
the house of Dagon and set it by Dagon.
and when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow behold
Dagon was fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of
the lord. and they took Dagon and set him in his place again.
and when they arose early on the morrow morning behold Dagon
was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the
lord and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands
were cut off upon the threshold only the stump of Dagon was
left to him.
therefore Neither the priests of Dagon nor any that come into
Dagon s house tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto
this day.
but the hand of the lord was heavy upon them of Ashdod and he
destroyed them and smote them with emerods even Ashdod and
the coasts thereof.
and when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so they said the
ark of the God of Israel shall not abide with us for his hand
is sore upon us and upon Dagon our God.
they sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the
Philistines unto them and said what shall we do with the ark
of the God of Israel? and they answered let the ark of the
God of Israel be carried about unto Gath. and they carried the
ark of the God of Israel about thither.
and it was so that after they had carried it about the hand
of the lord was against the city with a very great
destruction and he smote the men of the city both small and
great and they had emerods in their secret parts.
therefore they sent the ark of God to Ekron. and it came to
pass as the ark of God came to Ekron that the Ekronites
cried out saying they have brought about the ark of the God
of Israel to us to slay us and our people.
so they sent and gathered together all the lords of the
Philistines and said send away the ark of the God of Israel
and let it go again to his own place that it slay us not and
our people for there was a deadly destruction throughout all
the city the hand of God was very heavy there.
and the men that died not were smitten with the emerods and
the cry of the city went up to heaven.
and the ark of the lord was in the country of the Philistines
seven months.
and the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners
saying what shall we do to the ark of the lord? tell us
wherewith we shall send it to his place.
and they said if ye send away the ark of the God of Israel
send it not empty but in any wise return him a trespass
offering then ye shall be healed and it shall be known to
you why his hand is not removed from you.
then said they what shall be the trespass offering which we
shall return to him? they answered five golden emerods and
five golden mice according to the number of the lords of the
Philistines for one plague was on you all and on your lords.
wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods and images of
your mice that mar the land and ye shall give glory unto the
God of Israel peradventure he will lighten his hand from off
you and from off your gods and from off your land.
wherefore then do ye harden your hearts as the Egyptians and
Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully
among them did they not let the people go and they departed?
now therefore make a new cart and take two milch kine on
which there hath come no yoke and tie the kine to the cart
and bring their calves home from them
and take the ark of the lord and lay it upon the cart and
put the jewels of gold which ye return him for a trespass
offering in a coffer by the side thereof and send it away
that it may go.
and see if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to
Bethshemesh then he hath done us this great evil but if not
then we shall know that it is not his hand that smote us it
was a chance that happened to us.
and the men did so and took two milch kine and tied them to
the cart and shut up their calves at home
and they laid the ark of the lord upon the cart and the
coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their emerods.
and the kine took the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh
and went along the highway lowing as they went and turned
not aside to the right hand or to the left and the lords of
the Philistines went after them unto the border of
Bethshemesh.
and they of Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in
the valley and they lifted up their eyes and saw the ark
and rejoiced to see it.
and the cart came into the field of Joshua a Bethshemite and
stood there where there was a great stone and they clave the
wood of the cart and offered the kine a burnt offering unto
the lord.
and the Levites took down the ark of the lord and the coffer
that was with it wherein the jewels of gold were and put
them on the great stone and the men of Bethshemesh offered
burnt offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto
the lord.
and when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it they
returned to Ekron the same day.
and these are the golden emerods which the Philistines
returned for a trespass offering unto the lord for Ashdod
one for Gaza one for Askelon one for Gath one for Ekron
one
and the golden mice according to the number of all the cities
of the Philistines belonging to the five lords both of fenced
cities and of country villages even unto the great stone of
Abel whereon they set down the ark of the lord which stone
remaineth unto this day in the field of Joshua the
Bethshemite.
and he smote the men of Bethshemesh because they had looked
into the ark of the lord even he smote of the people fifty
thousand and threescore and Ten men and the people lamented
because the lord had smitten many of the people with a great
slaughter.
and the men of Bethshemesh said who is able to stand before
this holy lord God? and to whom shall he go up from us?
and they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjathjearim
saying the Philistines have brought again the ark of the
lord come ye down and fetch it up to you.
and the men of Kirjathjearim came and fetched up the ark of
the lord and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the
hill and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the
lord.
and it came to pass while the ark abode in Kirjathjearim
that the time was long for it was twenty years and all the
house of Israel lamented after the lord.
and Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel saying if ye
do return unto the lord with all your hearts then put away
the strange gods and Ashtaroth from among you and prepare
your hearts unto the lord and serve him only and he will
deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.
then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth
and served the lord only.
and Samuel said gather all Israel to Mizpeh and I will pray
for you unto the lord.
and they gathered together to Mizpeh and drew water and
poured it out before the lord and fasted on that day and
said there we have sinned against the lord. and Samuel judged
the children of Israel in Mizpeh.
and when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel
were gathered together to Mizpeh the lords of the Philistines
went up against Israel. and when the children of Israel heard
it they were afraid of the Philistines.
and the children of Israel said to Samuel cease not to cry
unto the lord our God for us that he will save us out of the
hand of the Philistines.
and Samuel took a sucking lamb and offered it for a burnt
offering wholly unto the lord and Samuel cried unto the lord
for Israel and the lord heard him.
and as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering the
Philistines drew near to battle against Israel but the lord
thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the
Philistines and discomfited them and they were smitten
before Israel.
and the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh and pursued the
Philistines and smote them until they came under Bethcar.
then Samuel took a stone and set it between Mizpeh and Shen
and called the name of it Ebenezer saying hitherto hath the
lord helped us.
so the Philistines were subdued and they came no more into
the coast of Israel and the hand of the lord was against the
Philistines all the days of Samuel.
and the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel
were restored to Israel from Ekron even unto Gath and the
coasts thereof did Israel deliver out of the hands of the
Philistines. and there was peace between Israel and the
Amorites.
and Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.
and he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel and
Gilgal and Mizpeh and judged Israel in all those places.
and his return was to Ramah for there was his house and
there he judged Israel and there he built an altar unto the
lord.
and it came to pass when Samuel was old that he made his
sons judges over Israel.
now the name of his firstborn was Joel and the name of his
second Abiah they were judges in Beersheba.
and his sons walked not in his ways but turned aside after
lucre and took bribes and perverted judgment.
then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together
and came to Samuel unto Ramah
and said unto him behold thou art old and thy sons walk not
in thy ways now make us a king to judge us like all the
nations.
but the thing displeased Samuel when they said give us a
king to judge us. and Samuel prayed unto the lord.
and the lord said unto Samuel hearken unto the voice of the
people in all that they say unto thee for they have not
rejected thee but they have rejected me that I should not
reign over them.
according to all the works which they have done since the day
that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day
wherewith they have forsaken me and served other gods so do
they also unto thee.
now therefore hearken unto their voice howbeit yet protest
solemnly unto them and shew them the manner of the king that
shall reign over them.
and Samuel told all the words of the lord unto the people that
asked of him a king.
and he said this will be the manner of the king that shall
reign over you he will take your sons and appoint them for
himself for his chariots and to be his horsemen and some
shall run before his chariots.
and he will appoint him captains over thousands and captains
over fifties and will set them to ear his ground and to reap
his harvest and to make his instruments of war and
instruments of his chariots.
and he will take your daughters to be confectionaries and to
be cooks and to be bakers.
and he will take your fields and your vineyards and your
oliveyards even the best of them and give them to his
servants.
and he will take the tenth of your seed and of your
vineyards and give to his officers and to his servants.
and he will take your menservants and your maidservants and
your goodliest young men and your asses and put them to his
work.
he will take the tenth of your sheep and ye shall be his
servants.
and ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye
shall have chosen you and the lord will not hear you in that
day.
nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel
and they said nay but we will have a king over us
that we also may be like all the nations and that our king
may judge us and go out before us and fight our battles.
and Samuel heard all the words of the people and he rehearsed
them in the ears of the lord.
and the lord said to Samuel hearken unto their voice and
make them a king. and Samuel said unto the men of Israel go
ye every man unto his city.
now there was a man of Benjamin whose name was Kish the son
of Abiel the son of Zeror the son of Bechorath the son of
Aphiah a Benjamite a Mighty man of power.
and he had a son whose name was Saul a choice young man and
a goodly and there was not among the children of Israel a
goodlier person than he from his shoulders and upward he was
higher than any of the people.
and the asses of Kish Saul s father were lost. and Kish said
to Saul his son take now one of the servants with thee and
Arise go seek the asses.
and he passed through mount Ephraim and passed through the
land of Shalisha but they found them not then they passed
through the land of Shalim and there they were not and he
passed through the land of the Benjamites but they found them
not.
and when they were come to the land of Zuph Saul said to his
servant that was with him come and let us return lest my
father leave caring for the asses and take thought for us.
and he said unto him behold now there is in this city a man
of God and he is an honourable man all that he saith cometh
surely to pass now let us go thither peradventure he can
shew us our way that we should go.
then said Saul to his servant but behold if we go what
shall we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels
and there is not a present to bring to the man of God what
have we?
and the servant answered Saul again and said behold I have
here at hand the fourth part of a shekel of Silver that will
I give to the man of God to tell us our way.
 beforetime in Israel when a man went to enquire of God thus
he spake come and let us go to the seer for he that is now
called a prophet was beforetime called a seer.
then said Saul to his servant well said come let us go. so
they went unto the city where the man of God was.
and as they went up the hill to the city they found young
maidens going out to draw water and said unto them is the
seer here?
and they answered them and said he is behold he is before
you make haste now for he came to day to the city for there
is a sacrifice of the people to day in the high place
as soon as ye be come into the city ye shall straightway find
him before he go up to the high place to eat for the people
will not eat until he come because he doth bless the
sacrifice and afterwards they eat that be bidden. now
therefore get you up for about this time ye shall find him.
and they went up into the city and when they were come into
the city behold Samuel came out against them for to go up
to the high place.
now the lord had told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul
came saying
to morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the
land of Benjamin and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over
my people Israel that he may save my people out of the hand
of the Philistines for I have looked upon my people because
their cry is come unto me.
and when Samuel saw Saul the lord said unto him behold the
man whom I spake to thee of this same shall reign over my
people.
then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate and said tell me
I pray thee where the seer s house is.
and Samuel answered Saul and said I Am the seer go up
before me unto the high place for ye shall eat with me to
day and to morrow I will let thee go and will tell thee all
that is in thine heart.
and as for thine asses that were lost three days ago set not
thy mind on them for they are found. and on whom is all the
desire of Israel? is it not on thee and on all thy father s
house?
and Saul answered and said Am not I a Benjamite of the
smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of
all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then
speakest thou so to me?
and Samuel took Saul and his servant and brought them into
the parlour and made them sit in the chiefest place among
them that were bidden which were about thirty persons.
and Samuel said unto the cook bring the portion which I gave
thee of which I said unto thee set it by thee.
and the cook took up the shoulder and that which was upon it
and set it before Saul. and Samuel said behold that which is
left set it before thee and eat for unto this time hath it
been kept for thee since I said I have invited the people. so
Saul did eat with Samuel that day.
and when they were come down from the high place into the
city Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house.
and they arose early and it came to pass about the spring of
the day that Samuel called Saul to the top of the house
saying up that I may send thee away. and Saul arose and
they went out both of them he and Samuel abroad.
and as they were going down to the end of the city Samuel
said to Saul bid the servant pass on before us and he
passed on but stand thou still a while that I may shew thee
the word of God.
then Samuel took a vial of oil and poured it upon his head
and kissed him and said is it not because the lord hath
anointed thee to be captain over his inheritance?
when thou art departed from me to day then thou shalt find
two men by Rachel s sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at
Zelzah and they will say unto thee the asses which thou
wentest to seek are found and lo thy father hath left the
care of the asses and sorroweth for you saying what shall I
do for my son?
then shalt thou go on forward from thence and thou shalt come
to the plain of Tabor and there shall meet thee three men
going up to God to Bethel one carrying three kids and
another carrying three loaves of bread and another carrying a
bottle of wine
and they will salute thee and give thee two loaves of bread
which thou shalt receive of their hands.
after that thou shalt come to the hill of God where is the
garrison of the Philistines and it shall come to pass when
thou art come thither to the city that thou shalt meet a
company of prophets coming down from the high place with a
psaltery and a tabret and a pipe and a harp before them
and they shall prophesy
and the spirit of the lord will come upon thee and thou shalt
prophesy with them and shalt be turned into another man.
and let it be when these signs are come unto thee that thou
do as occasion serve thee for God is with thee.
and thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal and behold I
will come down unto thee to offer burnt offerings and to
sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings seven days shalt thou
tarry till I come to thee and shew thee what thou shalt do.
and it was so that when he had turned his back to go from
Samuel God gave him another heart and all those signs came
to pass that day.
and when they came thither to the hill behold a company of
prophets met him and the spirit of God came upon him and he
prophesied among them.
and it came to pass when all that knew him beforetime saw
that behold he prophesied among the prophets then the
people said one to another what is this that is come unto the
son of Kish? is Saul also among the prophets?
and one of the same place answered and said but who is their
father? therefore it became a proverb is Saul also among the
prophets?
and when he had made an end of prophesying he came to the
high place.
and Saul s uncle said unto him and to his servant whither
went ye? and he said to seek the asses and when we saw that
they were no where we came to Samuel.
and Saul s uncle said tell me I pray thee what Samuel said
unto you.
and Saul said unto his uncle he told us plainly that the
asses were found. but of the matter of the kingdom whereof
Samuel spake he told him not.
and Samuel called the people together unto the lord to Mizpeh
and said unto the children of Israel thus saith the lord God
of Israel I brought up Israel out of Egypt and delivered you
out of the hand of the Egyptians and out of the hand of all
kingdoms and of them that oppressed you
and ye have this day rejected your God who himself saved you
out of all your adversities and your tribulations and ye have
said unto him nay but set a king over us. now therefore
present yourselves before the lord by your tribes and by your
thousands.
and when Samuel had caused all the tribes of Israel to come
near the tribe of Benjamin was taken.
when he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their
families the family of Matri was taken and Saul the son of
Kish was taken and when they sought him he could not be
found.
therefore they enquired of the lord further if the man should
yet come thither. and the lord answered behold he hath hid
himself among the stuff.
and they ran and fetched him thence and when he stood among
the people he was higher than any of the people from his
shoulders and upward.
and Samuel said to all the people see ye him whom the lord
hath chosen that there is none like him among all the people?
and all the people shouted and said God save the king.
then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom and
wrote it in a book and laid it up before the lord. and Samuel
sent all the people away every man to his house.
and Saul also went home to Gibeah and there went with him a
band of men whose hearts God had touched.
but the children of Belial said how shall this man save us?
and they despised him and brought no presents. but he held
his peace.
then Nahash the Ammonite came up and encamped against
Jabeshgilead and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash make
a covenant with us and we will serve thee.
and Nahash the Ammonite answered them on this condition will
I make a covenant with you that I may thrust out all your
right eyes and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.
and the elders of Jabesh said unto him give us seven days
respite that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of
Israel and then if there be no man to save us we will come
out to thee.
then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul and told the
tidings in the ears of the people and all the people lifted
up their voices and wept.
and behold Saul came after the herd out of the field and
Saul said what aileth the people that they weep? and they
told him the tidings of the men of Jabesh.
and the spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those
tidings and his anger was kindled greatly.
and he took a yoke of oxen and hewed them in pieces and sent
them throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of
messengers saying whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and
after Samuel so shall it be done unto his oxen. and the fear
of the lord fell on the people and they came out with one
consent.
and when he numbered them in Bezek the children of Israel
were three hundred thousand and the men of Judah thirty
thousand.
and they said unto the messengers that came thus shall ye say
unto the men of Jabeshgilead to morrow by that time the sun
be hot ye shall have help. and the messengers came and shewed
it to the men of Jabesh and they were glad.
therefore the men of Jabesh said to morrow we will come out
unto you and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto
you.
and it was so on the morrow that Saul put the people in three
companies and they came into the midst of the host in the
morning watch and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the
day and it came to pass that they which remained were
scattered so that two of them were not left together.
and the people said unto Samuel who is he that said shall
Saul reign over us? bring the men that we may put them to
death.
and Saul said there shall not a man be put to death this day
for to day the lord hath wrought salvation in Israel.
then said Samuel to the people come and let us go to Gilgal
and renew the kingdom there.
and all the people went to Gilgal and there they made Saul
king before the lord in Gilgal and there they sacrificed
sacrifices of peace offerings before the lord and there Saul
and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.
and Samuel said unto all Israel behold I have hearkened unto
your voice in all that ye said unto me and have made a king
over you.
and now behold the king walketh before you and I Am old and
grayheaded and behold my sons are with you and I have
walked before you from my childhood unto this day.
behold here I Am witness against me before the lord and
before his anointed whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have
I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or
of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes
therewith? and I will restore it you.
and they said thou hast not defrauded us nor oppressed us
Neither hast thou taken ought of any man s hand.
and he said unto them the lord is witness against you and
his anointed is witness this day that ye have not found ought
in my hand. and they answered he is witness.
and Samuel said unto the people it is the lord that advanced
Moses and Aaron and that brought your fathers up out of the
land of Egypt.
now therefore stand still that I may reason with you before
the lord of all the righteous acts of the lord which he did
to you and to your fathers.
when Jacob was come into Egypt and your fathers cried unto
the lord then the lord sent Moses and Aaron which brought
forth your fathers out of Egypt and made them dwell in this
place.
and when they forgat the lord their God he sold them into the
hand of Sisera captain of the host of Hazor and into the
hand of the Philistines and into the hand of the king of
Moab and they fought against them.
and they cried unto the lord and said we have sinned
because we have forsaken the lord and have served Baalim and
Ashtaroth but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies
and we will serve thee.
and the lord sent Jerubbaal and Bedan and Jephthah and
Samuel and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on
every side and ye dwelled safe.
and when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon
came against you ye said unto me nay but a king shall reign
over us when the lord your God was your king.
now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen and whom ye
have desired and behold the lord hath set a king over you.
if ye will fear the lord and serve him and obey his voice
and not rebel against the commandment of the lord then shall
both ye and also the king that reigneth over you continue
following the lord your God
but if ye will not obey the voice of the lord but rebel
against the commandment of the lord then shall the hand of
the lord be against you as it was against your fathers.
now therefore stand and see this great thing which the lord
will do before your eyes.
is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the lord and
he shall send thunder and rain that ye may perceive and see
that your wickedness is great which ye have done in the sight
of the lord in asking you a king.
so Samuel called unto the lord and the lord sent thunder and
rain that day and all the people greatly feared the lord and
Samuel.
and all the people said unto Samuel pray for thy servants
unto the lord thy God that we die not for we have added unto
all our sins this evil to ask us a king.
and Samuel said unto the people fear not ye have done all
this wickedness yet turn not aside from following the lord
but serve the lord with all your heart
and turn ye not aside for then should ye go after vain
things which cannot profit nor deliver for they are vain.
for the lord will not forsake his people for his great name s
sake because it hath pleased the lord to make you his people.
moreover as for me God forbid that I should Sin against the
lord in ceasing to pray for you but I will teach you the good
and the right way
only fear the lord and serve him in truth with all your
heart for consider how great things he hath done for you.
but if ye shall still do wickedly ye shall be consumed both
ye and your king.
Saul reigned one year and when he had reigned two years over
Israel
Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel whereof two
thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in mount Bethel and a
thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin and the
rest of the people he sent every man to his tent.
and Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in
Geba and the Philistines heard of it. and Saul blew the
trumpet throughout all the land saying let the Hebrews hear.
and all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten a garrison of
the Philistines and that Israel also was had in abomination
with the Philistines. and the people were called together
after Saul to Gilgal.
and the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with
Israel thirty thousand chariots and six thousand horsemen
and people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude
and they came up and pitched in Michmash eastward from
Bethaven.
when the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait for
the people were distressed then the people did hide
themselves in caves and in thickets and in rocks and in
high places and in pits.
and some of the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad
and Gilead. as for Saul he was yet in Gilgal and all the
people followed him trembling.
and he tarried seven days according to the set time that
Samuel had appointed but Samuel came not to Gilgal and the
people were scattered from him.
and Saul said bring hither a burnt offering to me and peace
offerings. and he offered the burnt offering.
and it came to pass that as soon as he had made an end of
offering the burnt offering behold Samuel came and Saul
went out to meet him that he might salute him.
and Samuel said what hast thou done? and Saul said because I
saw that the people were scattered from me and that thou
camest not within the days appointed and that the Philistines
gathered themselves together at Michmash
therefore said I the Philistines will come down now upon me
to Gilgal and I have not made supplication unto the lord I
forced myself therefore and offered a burnt offering.
and Samuel said to Saul thou hast done foolishly thou hast
not kept the commandment of the lord thy God which he
commanded thee for now would the lord have established thy
kingdom upon Israel for ever.
but now thy kingdom shall not continue the lord hath sought
him a man after his own heart and the lord hath commanded him
to be captain over his people because thou hast not kept that
which the lord commanded thee.
and Samuel arose and gat him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of
Benjamin. and Saul numbered the people that were present with
him about six hundred men.
and Saul and Jonathan his son and the people that were
present with them abode in Gibeah of Benjamin but the
Philistines encamped in Michmash.
and the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in
three companies one company turned unto the way that leadeth
to Ophrah unto the land of Shual
and another company turned the way to Bethhoron and another
company turned to the way of the border that looketh to the
valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.
now there was no smith found throughout all the land of
Israel for the Philistines said lest the Hebrews make them
swords or spears
but all the Israelites went down to the Philistines to
sharpen every man his share and his coulter and his axe and
his mattock.
yet they had a file for the mattocks and for the coulters
and for the forks and for the axes and to sharpen the goads.
so it came to pass in the day of battle that there was
Neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people
that were with Saul and Jonathan but with Saul and with
Jonathan his son was there found.
and the garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of
Michmash.
now it came to pass upon a day that Jonathan the son of Saul
said unto the young man that bare his armour come and let us
go over to the Philistines garrison that is on the other
side. but he told not his father.
and Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under a
pomegranate tree which is in Migron and the people that were
with him were about six hundred men
and Ahiah the son of Ahitub Ichabod s brother the son of
Phinehas the son of Eli the lord s priest in Shiloh wearing
an Ephod. and the people knew not that Jonathan was gone.
and between the passages by which Jonathan sought to go over
unto the Philistines garrison there was a Sharp rock on the
one side and a Sharp rock on the other side and the name of
the one was Bozez and the name of the other Seneh.
the forefront of the one was situate northward over against
Michmash and the other southward over against Gibeah.
and Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour come
and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised
it may be that the lord will work for us for there is no
restraint to the lord to save by many or by few.
and his armourbearer said unto him do all that is in thine
heart turn thee behold I Am with thee according to thy
heart.
then said Jonathan behold we will pass over unto these men
and we will discover ourselves unto them.
if they say thus unto us tarry until we come to you then we
will stand still in our place and will not go up unto them.
but if they say thus come up unto us then we will go up for
the lord hath delivered them into our hand and this shall be
a sign unto us.
and both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of
the Philistines and the Philistines said behold the Hebrews
come forth out of the holes where they had hid themselves.
and the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his
armourbearer and said come up to us and we will shew you a
thing. and Jonathan said unto his armourbearer come up after
me for the lord hath delivered them into the hand of Israel.
and Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet and
his armourbearer after him and they fell before Jonathan and
his armourbearer slew after him.
and that first slaughter which Jonathan and his armourbearer
made was about twenty men within as it were an half acre of
land which a yoke of oxen might plow.
and there was trembling in the host in the field and among
all the people the garrison and the spoilers they also
trembled and the earth quaked so it was a very great
trembling.
and the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked and
behold the multitude melted away and they went on beating
down one another.
then said Saul unto the people that were with him number now
and see who is gone from us. and when they had numbered
behold Jonathan and his armourbearer were not there.
and Saul said unto Ahiah bring hither the ark of God. for the
ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel.
and it came to pass while Saul talked unto the priest that
the noise that was in the host of the Philistines went on and
increased and Saul said unto the priest withdraw thine hand.
and Saul and all the people that were with him assembled
themselves and they came to the battle and behold every
man s sword was against his fellow and there was a very great
discomfiture.
moreover the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before
that time which went up with them into the camp from the
country round about even they also turned to be with the
Israelites that were with Saul and Jonathan.
likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in
mount Ephraim when they heard that the Philistines fled even
they also followed hard after them in the battle.
so the lord saved Israel that day and the battle passed over
unto Bethaven.
and the men of Israel were distressed that day for Saul had
adjured the people saying cursed be the man that eateth any
food until evening that I may be avenged on mine enemies. so
none of the people tasted any food.
and all they of the land came to a wood and there was honey
upon the ground.
and when the people were come into the wood behold the honey
dropped but no man put his hand to his mouth for the people
feared the oath.
but Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with
the oath wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was
in his hand and dipped it in an honeycomb and put his hand
to his mouth and his eyes were enlightened.
then answered one of the people and said thy father straitly
charged the people with an oath saying cursed be the man
that eateth any food this day. and the people were faint.
then said Jonathan my father hath troubled the land see I
pray you how mine eyes have been enlightened because I
tasted a little of this honey.
how Much more if haply the people had eaten freely to day of
the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not
been now a Much greater slaughter among the Philistines?
and they smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to
Aijalon and the people were very faint.
and the people flew upon the spoil and took sheep and oxen
and calves and slew them on the ground and the people did
eat them with the blood.
then they told Saul saying behold the people Sin against
the lord in that they eat with the blood. and he said ye
have transgressed roll a great stone unto me this day.
and Saul said disperse yourselves among the people and say
unto them bring me hither every man his ox and every man his
sheep and slay them here and eat and Sin not against the
lord in eating with the blood. and all the people brought
every man his ox with him that night and slew them there.
and Saul built an altar unto the lord the same was the first
altar that he built unto the lord.
and Saul said let us go down after the Philistines by night
and spoil them until the morning light and let us not leave a
man of them. and they said do whatsoever seemeth good unto
thee. then said the priest let us draw near hither unto God.
and Saul asked counsel of God shall I go down after the
Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of Israel?
but he answered him not that day.
and Saul said draw ye near hither all the chief of the
people and know and see wherein this Sin hath been this day.
for as the lord liveth which saveth Israel though it be in
Jonathan my son he shall surely die. but there was not a man
among all the people that answered him.
then said he unto all Israel be ye on one side and I and
Jonathan my son will be on the other side. and the people said
unto Saul do what seemeth good unto thee.
therefore Saul said unto the lord God of Israel give a
perfect Lot. and Saul and Jonathan were taken but the people
escaped.
and Saul said cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. and
Jonathan was taken.
then Saul said to Jonathan tell me what thou hast done. and
Jonathan told him and said I did but taste a little honey
with the end of the rod that was in mine hand and lo I must
die.
and Saul answered God do so and more also for thou shalt
surely die Jonathan.
and the people said unto Saul shall Jonathan die who hath
wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid as the
lord liveth there shall not one hair of his head fall to the
ground for he hath wrought with God this day. so the people
rescued Jonathan that he died not.
then Saul went up from following the Philistines and the
Philistines went to their own place.
so Saul took the kingdom over Israel and fought against all
his enemies on every side against Moab and against the
children of Ammon and against Edom and against the kings of
Zobah and against the Philistines and whithersoever he
turned himself he vexed them.
and he gathered an host and smote the Amalekites and
delivered Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them.
now the sons of Saul were Jonathan and Ishui and Melchishua
and the names of his two daughters were these the name of the
firstborn Merab and the name of the younger Michal
and the name of Saul s wife was Ahinoam the daughter of
Ahimaaz and the name of the captain of his host was Abner
the son of Ner Saul s uncle.
and Kish was the father of Saul and Ner the father of Abner
was the son of Abiel.
and there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of
Saul and when Saul saw any strong man or any valiant man he
took him unto him.
Samuel also said unto Saul the lord sent me to anoint thee to
be king over his people over Israel now therefore hearken
thou unto the voice of the words of the lord.
thus saith the lord of hosts I remember that which Amalek did
to Israel how he laid wait for him in the way when he came
up from Egypt.
now go and smite Amalek and utterly destroy all that they
have and spare them not but slay both man and woman infant
and suckling ox and sheep camel and ass.
and Saul gathered the people together and numbered them in
Telaim two hundred thousand footmen and Ten thousand men of
Judah.
and Saul came to a city of Amalek and laid wait in the
valley.
and Saul said unto the Kenites go depart get you down from
among the Amalekites lest I destroy you with them for ye
shewed kindness to all the children of Israel when they came
up out of Egypt. so the Kenites departed from among the
Amalekites.
and Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest
to Shur that is over against Egypt.
and he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive and utterly
destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.
but Saul and the people spared Agag and the best of the
sheep and of the oxen and of the fatlings and the lambs
and all that was good and would not utterly destroy them but
every thing that was vile and refuse that they destroyed
utterly.
then came the word of the lord unto Samuel saying
it repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king for he is
turned back from following me and hath not performed my
commandments. and it grieved Samuel and he cried unto the
lord all night.
and when Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning it was
told Samuel saying Saul came to Carmel and behold he set
him up a place and is gone about and passed on and gone
down to Gilgal.
and Samuel came to Saul and Saul said unto him blessed be
thou of the lord I have performed the commandment of the
lord.
and Samuel said what meaneth then this bleating of the sheep
in mine ears and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?
and Saul said they have brought them from the Amalekites for
the people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen to
sacrifice unto the lord thy God and the rest we have utterly
destroyed.
then Samuel said unto Saul stay and I will tell thee what
the lord hath said to me this night. and he said unto him say
on.
and Samuel said when thou wast little in thine own sight
wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel and the
lord anointed thee king over Israel?
and the lord sent thee on a journey and said go and utterly
destroy the sinners the Amalekites and fight against them
until they be consumed.
wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the lord but
didst fly upon the spoil and didst evil in the sight of the
lord?
and Saul said unto Samuel yea I have obeyed the voice of the
lord and have gone the way which the lord sent me and have
brought Agag the king of Amalek and have utterly destroyed
the Amalekites.
but the people took of the spoil sheep and oxen the chief of
the things which should have been utterly destroyed to
sacrifice unto the lord thy God in Gilgal.
and Samuel said hath the lord as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the lord?
behold to obey is better than sacrifice and to hearken than
the fat of rams.
for rebellion is as the Sin of witchcraft and stubbornness is
as iniquity and idolatry. because thou hast rejected the word
of the lord he hath also rejected thee from being king.
and Saul said unto Samuel I have sinned for I have
transgressed the commandment of the lord and thy words
because I feared the people and obeyed their voice.
now therefore I pray thee pardon my Sin and turn again with
me that I may worship the lord.
and Samuel said unto Saul I will not return with thee for
thou hast rejected the word of the lord and the lord hath
rejected thee from being king over Israel.
and as Samuel turned about to go away he laid hold upon the
skirt of his mantle and it rent.
and Samuel said unto him the lord hath rent the kingdom of
Israel from thee this day and hath given it to a neighbour of
thine that is better than thou.
and also the strength of Israel will not lie nor repent for
he is not a man that he should repent.
then he said I have sinned yet honour me now I pray thee
before the elders of my people and before Israel and turn
again with me that I may worship the lord thy God.
so Samuel turned again after Saul and Saul worshipped the
lord.
then said Samuel bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the
Amalekites. and Agag came unto him delicately. and Agag said
surely the bitterness of death is past.
and Samuel said as the sword hath made women childless so
shall thy mother be childless among women. and Samuel hewed
Agag in pieces before the lord in Gilgal.
then Samuel went to Ramah and Saul went up to his house to
Gibeah of Saul.
and Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his
death nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul and the lord
repented that he had made Saul king over Israel.
and the lord said unto Samuel how long wilt thou mourn for
Saul seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel?
fill thine horn with oil and go I will send thee to Jesse
the Bethlehemite for I have provided me a king among his
sons.
and Samuel said how can I go? if Saul hear it he will kill
me. and the lord said take an heifer with thee and say I Am
come to sacrifice to the lord.
and call Jesse to the sacrifice and I will shew thee what
thou shalt do and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name
unto thee.
and Samuel did that which the lord spake and came to
Bethlehem. and the elders of the town trembled at his coming
and said comest thou peaceably?
and he said peaceably I Am come to sacrifice unto the lord
sanctify yourselves and come with me to the sacrifice. and he
sanctified Jesse and his sons and called them to the
sacrifice.
and it came to pass when they were come that he looked on
Eliab and said surely the lord s anointed is before him.
but the lord said unto Samuel look not on his countenance or
on the height of his stature because I have refused him for
the lord seeth not as man seeth for man looketh on the
outward appearance but the lord looketh on the heart.
then Jesse called Abinadab and made him pass before Samuel.
and he said Neither hath the lord chosen this.
then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. and he said Neither hath
the lord chosen this.
again Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. and
Samuel said unto Jesse the lord hath not chosen these.
and Samuel said unto Jesse are here all thy children? and he
said there remaineth yet the youngest and behold he
keepeth the sheep. and Samuel said unto Jesse send and fetch
him for we will not sit down till he come hither.
and he sent and brought him in. now he was ruddy and withal
of a beautiful countenance and goodly to look to. and the
lord said Arise anoint him for this is he.
then Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the
midst of his brethren and the spirit of the lord came upon
David from that day forward. so Samuel rose up and went to
Ramah.
but the spirit of the lord departed from Saul and an evil
spirit from the lord troubled him.
and Saul s servants said unto him behold now an evil spirit
from God troubleth thee.
let our lord now command thy servants which are before thee
to seek out a man who is a cunning player on an harp and it
shall come to pass when the evil spirit from God is upon
thee that he shall play with his hand and thou shalt be
well.
and Saul said unto his servants provide me now a man that can
play well and bring him to me.
then answered one of the servants and said behold I have
seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite that is cunning in
playing and a Mighty valiant man and a man of war and
prudent in matters and a comely person and the lord is with
him.
wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse and said send me
David thy son which is with the sheep.
and Jesse took an ass laden with bread and a bottle of wine
and a kid and sent them by David his son unto Saul.
and David came to Saul and stood before him and he loved him
greatly and he became his armourbearer.
and Saul sent to Jesse saying let David I pray thee stand
before me for he hath found favour in my sight.
and it came to pass when the evil spirit from God was upon
Saul that David took an harp and played with his hand so
Saul was refreshed and was well and the evil spirit departed
from him.
now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle
and were gathered together at Shochoh which belongeth to
Judah and pitched between Shochoh and Azekah in Ephesdammim.
and Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together and
pitched by the valley of Elah and set the battle in array
against the Philistines.
and the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side and
Israel stood on a mountain on the other side and there was a
valley between them.
and there went out a champion out of the camp of the
Philistines named Goliath of Gath whose height was six
cubits and a span.
and he had an helmet of brass upon his head and he was armed
with a coat of mail and the weight of the coat was five
thousand shekels of brass.
and he had greaves of brass upon his legs and a target of
brass between his shoulders.
and the staff of his spear was like a weaver s beam and his
spear s head weighed six hundred shekels of Iron and one
bearing a shield went before him.
and he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel and said
unto them why are ye come out to set your battle in array? Am
not I a Philistine and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man
for you and let him come down to me.
if he be able to fight with me and to kill me then will we
be your servants but if I prevail against him and kill him
then shall ye be our servants and serve us.
and the Philistine said I defy the armies of Israel this day
give me a man that we may fight together.
when Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine
they were dismayed and greatly afraid.
now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah
whose name was Jesse and he had eight sons and the man went
among men for an old man in the days of Saul.
and the three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to
the battle and the names of his three sons that went to the
battle were Eliab the firstborn and next unto him Abinadab
and the third Shammah.
and David was the youngest and the three eldest followed
Saul.
but David went and returned from Saul to feed his father s
sheep at Bethlehem.
and the Philistine drew near morning and evening and
presented himself forty days.
and Jesse said unto David his son take now for thy brethren
an Ephah of this parched corn and these Ten loaves and run
to the camp of thy brethren
and carry these Ten cheeses unto the captain of their
thousand and look how thy brethren fare and take their
pledge.
now Saul and they and all the men of Israel were in the
valley of Elah fighting with the Philistines.
and David rose up early in the morning and left the sheep
with a keeper and took and went as Jesse had commanded him
and he came to the trench as the host was going forth to the
fight and shouted for the battle.
for Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array
army against army.
and David left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the
carriage and ran into the army and came and saluted his
brethren.
and as he talked with them behold there came up the
champion the Philistine of Gath Goliath by name out of the
armies of the Philistines and spake according to the same
words and David heard them.
and all the men of Israel when they saw the man fled from
him and were sore afraid.
and the men of Israel said have ye seen this man that is come
up? surely to defy Israel is he come up and it shall be that
the man who killeth him the king will enrich him with great
Riches and will give him his daughter and make his father s
house free in Israel.
and David spake to the men that stood by him saying what
shall be done to the man that killeth this Philistine and
taketh away the reproach from Israel? for who is this
uncircumcised Philistine that he should defy the armies of
the living God?
and the people answered him after this manner saying so
shall it be done to the man that killeth him.
and Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men
and Eliab s anger was kindled against David and he said why
camest thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those
few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride and the
naughtiness of thine heart for thou art come down that thou
mightest see the battle.
and David said what have I now done? is there not a cause?
and he turned from him toward another and spake after the
same manner and the people answered him again after the
former manner.
and when the words were heard which David spake they
rehearsed them before Saul and he sent for him.
and David said to Saul let no man s heart fail because of
him thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine.
and Saul said to David thou art not able to go against this
Philistine to fight with him for thou art but a youth and he
a man of war from his youth.
and David said unto Saul thy servant kept his father s sheep
and there came a lion and a bear and took a lamb out of the
flock
and I went out after him and smote him and delivered it out
of his mouth and when he arose against me I caught him by
his beard and smote him and slew him.
thy servant slew both the lion and the bear and this
uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them seeing he
hath defied the armies of the living God.
David said moreover the lord that delivered me out of the paw
of the lion and out of the paw of the bear he will deliver
me out of the hand of this Philistine. and Saul said unto
David go and the lord be with thee.
and Saul armed David with his armour and he put an helmet of
brass upon his head also he armed him with a coat of mail.
and David girded his sword upon his armour and he assayed to
go for he had not proved it. and David said unto Saul I
cannot go with these for I have not proved them. and David
put them off him.
and he took his staff in his hand and chose him five smooth
stones out of the brook and put them in a Shepherd s bag
which he had even in a scrip and his sling was in his hand
and he drew near to the Philistine.
and the Philistine came on and drew near unto David and the
man that bare the shield went before him.
and when the Philistine looked about and saw David he
disdained him for he was but a youth and ruddy and of a
fair countenance.
and the Philistine said unto David Am I a dog that thou
comest to me with staves? and the Philistine cursed David by
his gods.
and the Philistine said to David come to me and I will give
thy flesh unto the fowls of the air and to the beasts of the
field.
then said David to the Philistine thou comest to me with a
sword and with a spear and with a shield but I come to thee
in the name of the lord of hosts the God of the armies of
Israel whom thou hast defied.
this day will the lord deliver thee into mine hand and I will
smite thee and take thine head from thee and I will give the
carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the
fowls of the air and to the wild beasts of the earth that
all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel.
and all this assembly shall know that the lord saveth not with
sword and spear for the battle is the lord s and he will
give you into our hands.
and it came to pass when the Philistine arose and came and
drew nigh to meet David that David hastened and ran toward
the army to meet the Philistine.
and David put his hand in his bag and took thence a stone
and slang it and smote the Philistine in his forehead that
the stone sunk into his forehead and he fell upon his face to
the earth.
so David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a
stone and smote the Philistine and slew him but there was
no sword in the hand of David.
therefore David ran and stood upon the Philistine and took
his sword and drew it out of the sheath thereof and slew
him and cut off his head therewith. and when the Philistines
saw their champion was dead they fled.
and the men of Israel and of Judah arose and shouted and
pursued the Philistines until thou come to the valley and to
the gates of Ekron. and the wounded of the Philistines fell
down by the way to Shaaraim even unto Gath and unto Ekron.
and the children of Israel returned from chasing after the
Philistines and they spoiled their tents.
and David took the head of the Philistine and brought it to
Jerusalem but he put his armour in his tent.
and when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine he
said unto Abner the captain of the host Abner whose son is
this youth? and Abner said as thy soul liveth O king I
cannot tell.
and the king said enquire thou whose son the stripling is.
and as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine
Abner took him and brought him before Saul with the head of
the Philistine in his hand.
and Saul said to him whose son art thou thou young man? and
David answered I Am the son of thy servant Jesse the
Bethlehemite.
and it came to pass when he had made an end of speaking unto
Saul that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of
David and Jonathan loved him as his own soul.
and Saul took him that day and would let him go no more home
to his father s house.
then Jonathan and David made a covenant because he loved him
as his own soul.
and Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him
and gave it to David and his garments even to his sword and
to his bow and to his girdle.
and David went out whithersoever Saul sent him and behaved
himself wisely and Saul set him over the men of war and he
was accepted in the sight of all the people and also in the
sight of Saul s servants.
and it came to pass as they came when David was returned from
the slaughter of the Philistine that the women came out of
all cities of Israel singing and dancing to meet king Saul
with tabrets with joy and with instruments of musick.
and the women answered one another as they played and said
Saul hath slain his thousands and David his Ten thousands.
and Saul was very wroth and the saying displeased him and he
said they have ascribed unto David Ten thousands and to me
they have ascribed but thousands and what can he have more
but the kingdom?
and Saul eyed David from that day and forward.
and it came to pass on the morrow that the evil spirit from
God came upon Saul and he prophesied in the midst of the
house and David played with his hand as at other times and
there was a javelin in Saul s hand.
and Saul cast the javelin for he said I will smite David
even to the wall with it. and David avoided out of his
presence twice.
and Saul was afraid of David because the lord was with him
and was departed from Saul.
therefore Saul removed him from him and made him his captain
over a thousand and he went out and came in before the
people.
and David behaved himself wisely in all his ways and the lord
was with him.
wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely
he was afraid of him.
but all Israel and Judah loved David because he went out and
came in before them.
and Saul said to David behold my elder daughter Merab her
will I give thee to wife only be thou valiant for me and
fight the lord s battles. for Saul said let not mine hand be
upon him but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.
and David said unto Saul who Am I? and what is my life or my
father s family in Israel that I should be son in law to the
king?
but it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul s daughter
should have been given to David that she was given unto
Adriel the Meholathite to wife.
and Michal Saul s daughter loved David and they told Saul
and the thing pleased him.
and Saul said I will give him her that she may be a snare to
him and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him.
wherefore Saul said to David thou shalt this day be my son in
law in the one of the twain.
and Saul commanded his servants saying commune with David
secretly and say behold the king hath delight in thee and
all his servants love thee now therefore be the king s son in
law.
and Saul s servants spake those words in the ears of David.
and David said seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king s
son in law seeing that I Am a poor man and lightly esteemed?
and the servants of Saul told him saying on this manner
spake David.
and Saul said thus shall ye say to David the king desireth
not any dowry but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines to
be avenged of the king s enemies. but Saul thought to make
David fall by the hand of the Philistines.
and when his servants told David these words it pleased David
well to be the king s son in law and the days were not
expired.
wherefore David arose and went he and his men and slew of
the Philistines two hundred men and David brought their
foreskins and they gave them in full tale to the king that
he might be the king s son in law. and Saul gave him Michal
his daughter to wife.
and Saul saw and knew that the lord was with David and that
Michal Saul s daughter loved him.
and Saul was yet the more afraid of David and Saul became
David s enemy continually.
then the princes of the Philistines went forth and it came to
pass after they went forth that David behaved himself more
wisely than all the servants of Saul so that his name was
Much set by.
and Saul spake to Jonathan his son and to all his servants
that they should kill David.
but Jonathan Saul s son delighted Much in David and Jonathan
told David saying Saul my father seeketh to kill thee now
therefore I pray thee take heed to thyself until the
morning and abide in a secret place and hide thyself
and I will go out and stand beside my father in the field
where thou art and I will commune with my father of thee and
what I see that I will tell thee.
and Jonathan spake good of David unto Saul his father and
said unto him let not the king Sin against his servant
against David because he hath not sinned against thee and
because his works have been to thee-ward very good
for he did put his life in his hand and slew the Philistine
and the lord wrought a great salvation for all Israel thou
sawest it and didst rejoice wherefore then wilt thou Sin
against innocent blood to slay David without a cause?
and Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan and Saul sware
as the lord liveth he shall not be slain.
and Jonathan called David and Jonathan shewed him all those
things. and Jonathan brought David to Saul and he was in his
presence as in times past.
and there was war again and David went out and fought with
the Philistines and slew them with a great slaughter and
they fled from him.
and the evil spirit from the lord was upon Saul as he sat in
his house with his javelin in his hand and David played with
his hand.
and Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the
javelin but he slipped away out of Saul s presence and he
smote the javelin into the wall and David fled and escaped
that night.
Saul also sent messengers unto David s house to watch him
and to slay him in the morning and Michal David s wife told
him saying if thou save not thy life to night to morrow
thou shalt be slain.
so Michal let David down through a window and he went and
fled and escaped.
and Michal took an image and laid it in the bed and put a
pillow of goats hair for his bolster and covered it with a
cloth.
and when Saul sent messengers to take David she said he is
sick.
and Saul sent the messengers again to see David saying bring
him up to me in the bed that I may slay him.
and when the messengers were come in behold there was an
image in the bed with a pillow of goats hair for his
bolster.
and Saul said unto Michal why hast thou deceived me so and
sent away mine enemy that he is escaped? and Michal answered
Saul he said unto me let me go why should I kill thee?
so David fled and escaped and came to Samuel to Ramah and
told him all that Saul had done to him. and he and Samuel went
and dwelt in Naioth.
and it was told Saul saying behold David is at Naioth in
Ramah.
and Saul sent messengers to take David and when they saw the
company of the prophets prophesying and Samuel standing as
appointed over them the spirit of God was upon the messengers
of Saul and they also prophesied.
and when it was told Saul he sent other messengers and they
prophesied likewise. and Saul sent messengers again the third
time and they prophesied also.
then went he also to Ramah and came to a great well that is
in Sechu and he asked and said where are Samuel and David?
and one said behold they be at Naioth in Ramah.
and he went thither to Naioth in Ramah and the spirit of God
was upon him also and he went on and prophesied until he
came to Naioth in Ramah.
and he stripped off his clothes also and prophesied before
Samuel in like manner and lay down naked all that day and all
that night. wherefore they say is Saul also among the
prophets?
and David fled from Naioth in Ramah and came and said before
Jonathan what have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is
my Sin before thy father that he seeketh my life?
and he said unto him God forbid thou shalt not die behold
my father will do nothing either great or small but that he
will shew it me and why should my father hide this thing from
me? it is not so.
and David sware moreover and said thy father certainly
knoweth that I have found grace in thine eyes and he saith
let not Jonathan know this lest he be grieved but truly as
the lord liveth and as thy soul liveth there is but a step
between me and death.
then said Jonathan unto David whatsoever thy soul desireth I
will even do it for thee.
and David said unto Jonathan behold to morrow is the new
moon and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat but
let me go that I may hide myself in the field unto the third
day at even.
if thy father at all miss me then say David earnestly asked
leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city for there
is a yearly sacrifice there for all the family.
if he say thus it is well thy servant shall have peace but
if he be very wroth then be sure that evil is determined by
him.
therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant for thou
hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the lord with
thee notwithstanding if there be in me iniquity slay me
thyself for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father?
and Jonathan said far be it from thee for if I knew
certainly that evil were determined by my father to come upon
thee then would not I tell it thee?
then said David to Jonathan who shall tell me? or what if thy
father answer thee roughly?
and Jonathan said unto David come and let us go out into the
field. and they went out both of them into the field.
and Jonathan said unto David O lord God of Israel when I
have sounded my father about to morrow any time or the third
day and behold if there be good toward David and I then
send not unto thee and shew it thee
the lord do so and Much more to Jonathan but if it please my
father to do thee evil then I will shew it thee and send
thee away that thou mayest go in peace and the lord be with
thee as he hath been with my father.
and thou shalt not only while yet I live shew me the kindness
of the lord that I die not
but also thou shalt not cut off thy kindness from my house for
ever no not when the lord hath cut off the enemies of David
every one from the face of the earth.
so Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David saying
let the lord even require it at the hand of David s enemies.
and Jonathan caused David to swear again because he loved
him for he loved him as he loved his own soul.
then Jonathan said to David to morrow is the new moon and
thou shalt be missed because thy seat will be empty.
and when thou hast stayed three days then thou shalt go down
quickly and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself
when the business was in hand and shalt remain by the stone
Ezel.
and I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof as though I
shot at a Mark.
and behold I will send a lad saying go find out the
arrows. if I expressly say unto the lad behold the arrows
are on this side of thee take them then come thou for there
is peace to thee and no hurt as the lord liveth.
but if I say thus unto the young man behold the arrows are
beyond thee go thy way for the lord hath sent thee away.
and as touching the matter which thou and I have spoken of
behold the lord be between thee and me for ever.
so David hid himself in the field and when the new moon was
come the king sat him down to eat meat.
and the king sat upon his seat as at other times even upon a
seat by the wall and Jonathan arose and Abner sat by Saul s
side and David s place was empty.
nevertheless Saul spake not any thing that day for he
thought something hath befallen him he is not clean surely
he is not clean.
and it came to pass on the morrow which was the second day of
the month that David s place was empty and Saul said unto
Jonathan his son wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to
meat Neither yesterday nor to day?
and Jonathan answered Saul David earnestly asked leave of me
to go to Bethlehem
and he said let me go I pray thee for our family hath a
sacrifice in the city and my brother he hath commanded me to
be there and now if I have found favour in thine eyes let
me get away I pray thee and see my brethren. therefore he
cometh not unto the king s table.
then Saul s anger was kindled against Jonathan and he said
unto him thou son of the perverse rebellious woman do not I
know that thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own
confusion and unto the confusion of thy mother s nakedness?
for as long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the ground thou
shalt not be established nor thy kingdom. wherefore now send
and fetch him unto me for he shall surely die.
and Jonathan answered Saul his father and said unto him
wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done?
and Saul cast a javelin at him to smite him whereby Jonathan
knew that it was determined of his father to slay David.
so Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger and did eat
no meat the second day of the month for he was grieved for
David because his father had done him shame.
and it came to pass in the morning that Jonathan went out
into the field at the time appointed with David and a little
lad with him.
and he said unto his lad run find out now the arrows which I
shoot. and as the lad ran he shot an arrow beyond him.
and when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which
Jonathan had shot Jonathan cried after the lad and said is
not the arrow beyond thee?
and Jonathan cried after the lad make speed haste stay not.
and Jonathan s lad gathered up the arrows and came to his
Master.
but the lad knew not any thing only Jonathan and David knew
the matter.
and Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad and said unto
him go carry them to the city.
and as soon as the lad was gone David arose out of a place
toward the south and fell on his face to the ground and
bowed himself three times and they kissed one another and
wept one with another until David exceeded.
and Jonathan said to David go in peace forasmuch as we have
sworn both of us in the name of the lord saying the lord be
between me and thee and between my seed and thy seed for
ever. and he arose and departed and Jonathan went into the
city.
then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest and Ahimelech
was afraid at the meeting of David and said unto him why art
thou alone and no man with thee?
and David said unto Ahimelech the priest the king hath
commanded me a business and hath said unto me let no man
know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee and
what I have commanded thee and I have appointed my servants
to such and such a place.
now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of
bread in mine hand or what there is present.
and the priest answered David and said there is no common
bread under mine hand but there is hallowed bread if the
young men have kept themselves at least from women.
and David answered the priest and said unto him of a truth
women have been kept from us about these three days since I
came out and the vessels of the young men are holy and the
bread is in a manner common yea though it were sanctified
this day in the vessel.
so the priest gave him hallowed bread for there was no bread
there but the shewbread that was taken from before the lord
to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away.
now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day
detained before the lord and his name was Doeg an Edomite
the chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul.
and David said unto Ahimelech and is there not here under
thine hand spear or sword? for I have Neither brought my sword
nor my weapons with me because the king s business required
haste.
and the priest said the sword of Goliath the Philistine whom
thou slewest in the valley of Elah behold it is here wrapped
in a cloth behind the Ephod if thou wilt take that take it
for there is no other save that here. and David said there is
none like that give it me.
and David arose and fled that day for fear of Saul and went
to Achish the king of Gath.
and the servants of Achish said unto him is not this David
the king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him
in dances saying Saul hath slain his thousands and David
his Ten thousands?
and David laid up these words in his heart and was sore
afraid of Achish the king of Gath.
and he changed his behaviour before them and feigned himself
mad in their hands and scrabbled on the doors of the gate
and let his spittle fall down upon his beard.
then said Achish unto his servants lo ye see the man is mad
wherefore then have ye brought him to me?
have I need of mad men that ye have brought this fellow to
play the mad man in my presence? shall this fellow come into
my house?
David therefore departed thence and escaped to the cave
Adullam and when his brethren and all his father s house
heard it they went down thither to him.
and every one that was in distress and every one that was in
debt and every one that was discontented gathered themselves
unto him and he became a captain over them and there were
with him about four hundred men.
and David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab and he said unto the
king of Moab let my father and my mother I pray thee come
forth and be with you till I know what God will do for me.
and he brought them before the king of Moab and they dwelt
with him all the while that David was in the hold.
and the prophet Gad said unto David abide not in the hold
depart and get thee into the land of Judah. then David
departed and came into the forest of Hareth.
when Saul heard that David was discovered and the men that
were with him now Saul abode in Gibeah under a tree in
Ramah having his spear in his hand and all his servants were
standing about him
then Saul said unto his servants that stood about him hear
now ye Benjamites will the son of Jesse give every one of
you fields and vineyards and make you all captains of
thousands and captains of hundreds
that all of you have conspired against me and there is none
that sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of
Jesse and there is none of you that is sorry for me or
sheweth unto me that my son hath stirred up my servant against
me to lie in wait as at this day?
then answered Doeg the Edomite which was set over the
servants of Saul and said I saw the son of Jesse coming to
Nob to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.
and he enquired of the lord for him and gave him victuals
and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.
then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest the son of
Ahitub and all his father s house the priests that were in
Nob and they came all of them to the king.
and Saul said hear now thou son of Ahitub. and he answered
here I Am my lord.
and Saul said unto him why have ye conspired against me thou
and the son of Jesse in that thou hast given him bread and a
sword and hast enquired of God for him that he should rise
against me to lie in wait as at this day?
then Ahimelech answered the king and said and who is so
faithful among all thy servants as David which is the king s
son in law and goeth at thy bidding and is honourable in
thine house?
did I then begin to enquire of God for him? be it far from me
let not the king impute any thing unto his servant nor to all
the house of my father for thy servant knew nothing of all
this less or more.
and the king said thou shalt surely die Ahimelech thou and
all thy father s house.
and the king said unto the footmen that stood about him turn
and slay the priests of the lord because their hand also is
with David and because they knew when he fled and did not
shew it to me. but the servants of the king would not put
forth their hand to fall upon the priests of the lord.
and the king said to Doeg turn thou and fall upon the
priests. and Doeg the Edomite turned and he fell upon the
priests and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that
did wear a linen Ephod.
and Nob the city of the priests smote he with the edge of
the sword both men and women children and sucklings and
oxen and asses and sheep with the edge of the sword.
and one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub named
Abiathar escaped and fled after David.
and Abiathar shewed David that Saul had slain the lord s
priests.
and David said unto Abiathar I knew it that day when Doeg
the Edomite was there that he would surely tell Saul I have
occasioned the death of all the persons of thy father s house.
abide thou with me fear not for he that seeketh my life
seeketh thy life but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.
then they told David saying behold the Philistines fight
against Keilah and they rob the threshingfloors.
therefore David enquired of the lord saying shall I go and
smite these Philistines? and the lord said unto David go and
smite the Philistines and save Keilah.
and David s men said unto him behold we be afraid here in
Judah how Much more then if we come to Keilah against the
armies of the Philistines?
then David enquired of the lord yet again. and the lord
answered him and said Arise go down to Keilah for I will
deliver the Philistines into thine hand.
so David and his men went to Keilah and fought with the
Philistines and brought away their cattle and smote them
with a great slaughter. so David saved the inhabitants of
Keilah.
and it came to pass when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled
to David to Keilah that he came down with an Ephod in his
hand.
and it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah. and Saul
said God hath delivered him into mine hand for he is shut
in by entering into a town that hath gates and bars.
and Saul called all the people together to war to go down to
Keilah to besiege David and his men.
and David knew that Saul secretly practised mischief against
him and he said to Abiathar the priest bring hither the
Ephod.
then said David O lord God of Israel thy servant hath
certainly heard that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah to
destroy the city for my sake.
will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? will Saul
come down as thy servant hath heard? O lord God of Israel I
beseech thee tell thy servant. and the lord said he will
come down.
then said David will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men
into the hand of Saul? and the lord said they will deliver
thee up.
then David and his men which were about six hundred arose
and departed out of Keilah and went whithersoever they could
go. and it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah
and he forbare to go forth.
and David abode in the wilderness in strong holds and
remained in a mountain in the wilderness of Ziph. and Saul
sought him every day but God delivered him not into his hand.
and David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life and
David was in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood.
and Jonathan Saul s son arose and went to David into the
wood and strengthened his hand in God.
and he said unto him fear not for the hand of Saul my father
shall not find thee and thou shalt be king over Israel and I
shall be next unto thee and that also Saul my father knoweth.
and they two made a covenant before the lord and David abode
in the wood and Jonathan went to his house.
then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah saying doth not
David hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood in the
hill of Hachilah which is on the south of Jeshimon?
now therefore O king come down according to all the desire
of thy soul to come down and our part shall be to deliver him
into the king s hand.
and Saul said blessed be ye of the lord for ye have
compassion on me.
go I pray you prepare yet and know and see his place where
his haunt is and who hath seen him there for it is told me
that he dealeth very subtilly.
see therefore and take knowledge of all the lurking places
where he hideth himself and come ye again to me with the
certainty and I will go with you and it shall come to pass
if he be in the land that I will search him out throughout
all the thousands of Judah.
and they arose and went to Ziph before Saul but David and
his men were in the wilderness of Maon in the plain on the
south of Jeshimon.
Saul also and his men went to seek him. and they told David
wherefore he came down into a rock and abode in the
wilderness of Maon. and when Saul heard that he pursued after
David in the wilderness of Maon.
and Saul went on this side of the mountain and David and his
men on that side of the mountain and David made haste to get
away for fear of Saul for Saul and his men compassed David
and his men round about to take them.
but there came a messenger unto Saul saying haste thee and
come for the Philistines have invaded the land.
wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David and went
against the Philistines therefore they called that place
Selahammahlekoth.
and David went up from thence and dwelt in strong holds at
Engedi.
and it came to pass when Saul was returned from following the
Philistines that it was told him saying behold David is in
the wilderness of Engedi.
then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel
and went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild
goats.
and he came to the sheepcotes by the way where was a cave
and Saul went in to cover his feet and David and his men
remained in the sides of the cave.
and the men of David said unto him behold the day of which
the lord said unto thee behold I will deliver thine enemy
into thine hand that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem
good unto thee. then David arose and cut off the skirt of
Saul s robe privily.
and it came to pass afterward that David s heart smote him
because he had cut off Saul s skirt.
and he said unto his men the lord forbid that I should do
this thing unto my Master the lord s anointed to stretch
forth mine hand against him seeing he is the anointed of the
lord.
so David stayed his servants with these words and suffered
them not to rise against Saul. but Saul rose up out of the
cave and went on his way.
David also arose afterward and went out of the cave and
cried after Saul saying my lord the king. and when Saul
looked behind him David stooped with his face to the earth
and bowed himself.
and David said to Saul wherefore hearest thou men s words
saying behold David seeketh thy hurt?
behold this day thine eyes have seen how that the lord had
delivered thee to day into mine hand in the cave and some
bade me kill thee but mine eye spared thee and I said I
will not put forth mine hand against my lord for he is the
lord s anointed.
moreover my father see yea see the skirt of thy robe in my
hand for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe and killed
thee not know thou and see that there is Neither evil nor
transgression in mine hand and I have not sinned against
thee yet thou huntest my soul to take it.
the lord judge between me and thee and the lord avenge me of
thee but mine hand shall not be upon thee.
as saith the proverb of the ancients wickedness proceedeth
from the wicked but mine hand shall not be upon thee.
after whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost
thou pursue? after a dead dog after a flea.
the lord therefore be judge and judge between me and thee
and see and plead my cause and deliver me out of thine hand.
and it came to pass when David had made an end of speaking
these words unto Saul that Saul said is this thy voice my
son David? and Saul lifted up his voice and wept.
and he said to David thou art more righteous than I for thou
hast rewarded me good whereas I have rewarded thee evil.
and thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well
with me forasmuch as when the lord had delivered me into
thine hand thou killedst me not.
for if a man find his enemy will he let him go well away?
wherefore the lord reward thee good for that thou hast done
unto me this day.
and now behold I know well that thou shalt surely be king
and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine
hand.
swear now therefore unto me by the lord that thou wilt not
cut off my seed after me and that thou wilt not destroy my
name out of my father s house.
and David sware unto Saul. and Saul went home but David and
his men gat them up unto the hold.
and Samuel died and all the Israelites were gathered
together and lamented him and buried him in his house at
Ramah. and David arose and went down to the wilderness of
Paran.
and there was a man in Maon whose possessions were in Carmel
and the man was very great and he had three thousand sheep
and a thousand goats and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.
now the name of the man was Nabal and the name of his wife
Abigail and she was a woman of good understanding and of a
beautiful countenance but the man was churlish and evil in
his doings and he was of the house of Caleb.
and David heard in the wilderness that Nabal did shear his
sheep.
and David sent out Ten young men and David said unto the
young men get you up to Carmel and go to Nabal and greet
him in my name
and thus shall ye say to him that liveth in prosperity peace
be both to thee and peace be to thine house and peace be
unto all that thou hast.
and now I have heard that thou hast shearers now thy
shepherds which were with us we hurt them not Neither was
there ought missing unto them all the while they were in
Carmel.
ask thy young men and they will shew thee. wherefore let the
young men find favour in thine eyes for we come in a good
day give I pray thee whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto
thy servants and to thy son David.
and when David s young men came they spake to Nabal according
to all those words in the name of David and ceased.
and Nabal answered David s servants and said who is David?
and who is the son of Jesse? there be many servants now a days
that break away every man from his Master.
shall I then take my bread and my water and my flesh that I
have killed for my shearers and give it unto men whom I know
not whence they be?
so David s young men turned their way and went again and
came and told him all those sayings.
and David said unto his men gird ye on every man his sword.
and they girded on every man his sword and David also girded
on his sword and there went up after David about four hundred
men and two hundred abode by the stuff.
but one of the young men told Abigail Nabal s wife saying
behold David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute
our Master and he railed on them.
but the men were very good unto us and we were not hurt
Neither missed we any thing as long as we were conversant
with them when we were in the fields
they were a wall unto us both by night and day all the while
we were with them keeping the sheep.
now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do for evil is
determined against our Master and against all his household
for he is such a son of Belial that a man cannot speak to
him.
then Abigail made haste and took two hundred loaves and two
bottles of wine and five sheep ready dressed and five
measures of parched corn and an hundred clusters of raisins
and two hundred cakes of figs and laid them on asses.
and she said unto her servants go on before me behold I
come after you. but she told not her husband Nabal.
and it was so as she rode on the ass that she came down by
the covert on the hill and behold David and his men came
down against her and she met them.
now David had said surely in vain have I kept all that this
fellow hath in the wilderness so that nothing was missed of
all that pertained unto him and he hath requited me evil for
good.
so and more also do God unto the enemies of David if I leave
of all that pertain to him by the morning light any that
pisseth against the wall.
and when Abigail saw David she hasted and lighted off the
ass and fell before David on her face and bowed herself to
the ground
and fell at his feet and said upon me my lord upon me let
this iniquity be and let thine handmaid I pray thee speak
in thine audience and hear the words of thine handmaid.
let not my lord I pray thee regard this man of Belial even
Nabal for as his name is so is he Nabal is his name and
folly is with him but I thine handmaid saw not the young men
of my lord whom thou didst send.
now therefore my lord as the lord liveth and as thy soul
liveth seeing the lord hath withholden thee from coming to
shed blood and from avenging thyself with thine own hand now
let thine enemies and they that seek evil to my lord be as
Nabal.
and now this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto
my lord let it even be given unto the young men that follow
my lord.
I pray thee forgive the trespass of thine handmaid for the
lord will certainly make my lord a sure house because my lord
fighteth the battles of the lord and evil hath not been found
in thee all thy days.
yet a man is risen to pursue thee and to seek thy soul but
the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with
the lord thy God and the souls of thine enemies them shall
he sling out as out of the middle of a sling.
and it shall come to pass when the lord shall have done to my
lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning
thee and shall have appointed thee ruler over Israel
that this shall be no grief unto thee nor offence of heart
unto my lord either that thou hast shed blood causeless or
that my lord hath avenged himself but when the lord shall
have dealt well with my lord then remember thine handmaid.
and David said to Abigail blessed be the lord God of Israel
which sent thee this day to meet me
and blessed be thy advice and blessed be thou which hast
kept me this day from coming to shed blood and from avenging
myself with mine own hand.
for in very deed as the lord God of Israel liveth which hath
kept me back from hurting thee except thou hadst hasted and
come to meet me surely there had not been left unto Nabal by
the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.
so David received of her hand that which she had brought him
and said unto her go up in peace to thine house see I have
hearkened to thy voice and have accepted thy person.
and Abigail came to Nabal and behold he held a feast in his
house like the feast of a king and Nabal s heart was merry
within him for he was very drunken wherefore she told him
nothing less or more until the morning light.
but it came to pass in the morning when the wine was gone out
of Nabal and his wife had told him these things that his
heart died within him and he became as a stone.
and it came to pass about Ten days after that the lord smote
Nabal that he died.
and when David heard that Nabal was dead he said blessed be
the lord that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the
hand of Nabal and hath kept his servant from evil for the
lord hath returned the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head.
and David sent and communed with Abigail to take her to him
to wife.
and when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel
they spake unto her saying David sent us unto thee to take
thee to him to wife.
and she arose and bowed herself on her face to the earth and
said behold let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet
of the servants of my lord.
and Abigail hasted and arose and rode upon an ass with five
damsels of hers that went after her and she went after the
messengers of David and became his wife.
David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel and they were also both of
them his wives.
but Saul had given Michal his daughter David s wife to
Phalti the son of Laish which was of Gallim.
and the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah saying doth not
David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah which is before
Jeshimon?
then Saul arose and went down to the wilderness of Ziph
having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him to seek
David in the wilderness of Ziph.
and Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah which is before
Jeshimon by the way. but David abode in the wilderness and
he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.
David therefore sent out spies and understood that Saul was
come in very deed.
and David arose and came to the place where Saul had pitched
and David beheld the place where Saul lay and Abner the son
of Ner the captain of his host and Saul lay in the trench
and the people pitched round about him.
then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite and to
Abishai the son of Zeruiah brother to Joab saying who will
go down with me to Saul to the camp? and Abishai said I will
go down with thee.
so David and Abishai came to the people by night and behold
Saul lay sleeping within the trench and his spear stuck in
the ground at his bolster but Abner and the people lay round
about him.
then said Abishai to David God hath delivered thine enemy
into thine hand this day now therefore let me smite him I
pray thee with the spear even to the earth at once and I
will not smite him the second time.
and David said to Abishai destroy him not for who can
stretch forth his hand against the lord s anointed and be
guiltless?
David said furthermore as the lord liveth the lord shall
smite him or his day shall come to die or he shall descend
into battle and perish.
the lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against
the lord s anointed but I pray thee take thou now the spear
that is at his bolster and the cruse of water and let us go.
so David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul s
bolster and they gat them away and no man saw it nor knew
it Neither awaked for they were all asleep because a deep
sleep from the lord was fallen upon them.
then David went over to the other side and stood on the top
of an hill afar off a great space being between them
and David cried to the people and to Abner the son of Ner
saying answerest thou not Abner? then Abner answered and
said who art thou that criest to the king?
and David said to Abner art not thou a valiant man? and who
is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept
thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in to
destroy the king thy lord.
this thing is not good that thou hast done. as the lord
liveth ye are worthy to die because ye have not kept your
Master the lord s anointed. and now see where the king s
spear is and the cruse of water that was at his bolster.
and Saul knew David s voice and said is this thy voice my
son David? and David said it is my voice my lord O king.
and he said wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his
servant? for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand?
now therefore I pray thee let my lord the king hear the
words of his servant. if the lord have stirred thee up against
me let him accept an offering but if they be the children of
men cursed be they before the lord for they have driven me
out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the lord
saying go serve other gods.
now therefore let not my blood fall to the earth before the
face of the lord for the king of Israel is come out to seek a
flea as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.
then said Saul I have sinned return my son David for I
will no more do thee harm because my soul was precious in
thine eyes this day behold I have played the fool and have
erred exceedingly.
and David answered and said behold the king s spear and let
one of the young men come over and fetch it.
the lord render to every man his righteousness and his
faithfulness for the lord delivered thee into my hand to day
but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the lord s
anointed.
and behold as thy life was Much set by this day in mine
eyes so let my life be Much set by in the eyes of the lord
and let him deliver me out of all tribulation.
then Saul said to David blessed be thou my son David thou
shalt both do great things and also shalt still prevail. so
David went on his way and Saul returned to his place.
and David said in his heart I shall now perish one day by the
hand of Saul there is nothing better for me than that I
should speedily escape into the land of the Philistines and
Saul shall despair of me to seek me any more in any coast of
Israel so shall I escape out of his hand.
and David arose and he passed over with the six hundred men
that were with him unto Achish the son of Maoch king of
Gath.
and David dwelt with Achish at Gath he and his men every man
with his household even David with his two wives Ahinoam the
Jezreelitess and Abigail the Carmelitess Nabal s wife.
and it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath and he
sought no more again for him.
and David said unto Achish if I have now found grace in thine
eyes let them give me a place in some town in the country
that I may dwell there for why should thy servant dwell in
the royal city with thee?
then Achish gave him Ziklag that day wherefore Ziklag
pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto this day.
and the time that David dwelt in the country of the
Philistines was a full year and four months.
and David and his men went up and invaded the Geshurites and
the Gezrites and the Amalekites for those nations were of
old the inhabitants of the land as thou goest to Shur even
unto the land of Egypt.
and David smote the land and left Neither man nor woman
alive and took away the sheep and the oxen and the asses
and the camels and the apparel and returned and came to
Achish.
and Achish said whither have ye made a road to day? and David
said against the south of Judah and against the south of the
Jerahmeelites and against the south of the Kenites.
and David saved Neither man nor woman alive to bring tidings
to Gath saying lest they should tell on us saying so did
David and so will be his manner all the while he dwelleth in
the country of the Philistines.
and Achish believed David saying he hath made his people
Israel utterly to abhor him therefore he shall be my servant
for ever.
and it came to pass in those days that the Philistines
gathered their armies together for warfare to fight with
Israel. and Achish said unto David know thou assuredly that
thou shalt go out with me to battle thou and thy men.
and David said to Achish surely thou shalt know what thy
servant can do. and Achish said to David therefore will I
make thee keeper of mine head for ever.
now Samuel was dead and all Israel had lamented him and
buried him in Ramah even in his own city. and Saul had put
away those that had familiar spirits and the wizards out of
the land.
and the Philistines gathered themselves together and came and
pitched in Shunem and Saul gathered all Israel together and
they pitched in Gilboa.
and when Saul saw the host of the Philistines he was afraid
and his heart greatly trembled.
and when Saul enquired of the lord the lord answered him not
Neither by dreams nor by Urim nor by prophets.
then said Saul unto his servants seek me a woman that hath a
familiar spirit that I may go to her and enquire of her. and
his servants said to him behold there is a woman that hath a
familiar spirit at Endor.
and Saul disguised himself and put on other raiment and he
went and two men with him and they came to the woman by
night and he said I pray thee divine unto me by the
familiar spirit and bring me him up whom I shall name unto
thee.
and the woman said unto him behold thou knowest what Saul
hath done how he hath cut off those that have familiar
spirits and the wizards out of the land wherefore then
layest thou a snare for my life to cause me to die?
and Saul sware to her by the lord saying as the lord liveth
there shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing.
then said the woman whom shall I bring up unto thee? and he
said bring me up Samuel.
and when the woman saw Samuel she cried with a loud voice
and the woman spake to Saul saying why hast thou deceived
me? for thou art Saul.
and the king said unto her be not afraid for what sawest
thou? and the woman said unto Saul I saw gods ascending out
of the earth.
and he said unto her what form is he of? and she said an old
man cometh up and he is covered with a mantle. and Saul
perceived that it was Samuel and he stooped with his face to
the ground and bowed himself.
and Samuel said to Saul why hast thou disquieted me to bring
me up? and Saul answered I Am sore distressed for the
Philistines make war against me and God is departed from me
and answereth me no more Neither by prophets nor by dreams
therefore I have called thee that thou mayest make known unto
me what I shall do.
then said Samuel wherefore then dost thou ask of me seeing
the lord is departed from thee and is become thine enemy?
and the lord hath done to him as he spake by me for the lord
hath rent the kingdom out of thine hand and given it to thy
neighbour even to David
because thou obeyedst not the voice of the lord nor
executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek therefore hath the
lord done this thing unto thee this day.
moreover the lord will also deliver Israel with thee into the
hand of the Philistines and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons
be with me the lord also shall deliver the host of Israel
into the hand of the Philistines.
then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth and was
sore afraid because of the words of Samuel and there was no
strength in him for he had eaten no bread all the day nor
all the night.
and the woman came unto Saul and saw that he was sore
troubled and said unto him behold thine handmaid hath
obeyed thy voice and I have put my life in my hand and have
hearkened unto thy words which thou spakest unto me.
now therefore I pray thee hearken thou also unto the voice
of thine handmaid and let me set a morsel of bread before
thee and eat that thou mayest have strength when thou goest
on thy way.
but he refused and said I will not eat. but his servants
together with the woman compelled him and he hearkened unto
their voice. so he arose from the earth and sat upon the bed.
and the woman had a fat calf in the house and she hasted and
killed it and took flour and kneaded it and did bake
unleavened bread thereof
and she brought it before Saul and before his servants and
they did eat. then they rose up and went away that night.
now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to
Aphek and the Israelites pitched by a fountain which is in
Jezreel.
and the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds and by
thousands but David and his men passed on in the rereward
with Achish.
then said the princes of the Philistines what do these
Hebrews here? and Achish said unto the princes of the
Philistines is not this David the servant of Saul the king
of Israel which hath been with me these days or these years
and I have found no fault in him since he fell unto me unto
this day?
and the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him and
the princes of the Philistines said unto him make this fellow
return that he may go again to his place which thou hast
appointed him and let him not go down with us to battle lest
in the battle he be an adversary to us for wherewith should
he reconcile himself unto his Master? should it not be with
the heads of these men?
is not this David of whom they sang one to another in dances
saying Saul slew his thousands and David his Ten thousands?
then Achish called David and said unto him surely as the
lord liveth thou hast been upright and thy going out and thy
coming in with me in the host is good in my sight for I have
not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me
unto this day nevertheless the lords favour thee not.
wherefore now return and go in peace that thou displease not
the lords of the Philistines.
and David said unto Achish but what have I done? and what
hast thou found in thy servant so long as I have been with
thee unto this day that I may not go fight against the
enemies of my lord the king?
and Achish answered and said to David I know that thou art
good in my sight as an angel of God notwithstanding the
princes of the Philistines have said he shall not go up with
us to the battle.
wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy Master s
servants that are come with thee and as soon as ye be up
early in the morning and have light depart.
so David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning
to return into the land of the Philistines. and the
Philistines went up to Jezreel.
and it came to pass when David and his men were come to
Ziklag on the third day that the Amalekites had invaded the
south and Ziklag and smitten Ziklag and burned it with
fire
and had taken the women captives that were therein they slew
not any either great or small but carried them away and
went on their way.
so David and his men came to the city and behold it was
burned with fire and their wives and their sons and their
daughters were taken captives.
then David and the people that were with him lifted up their
voice and wept until they had no more power to weep.
and David s two wives were taken captives Ahinoam the
Jezreelitess and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
and David was greatly distressed for the people spake of
stoning him because the soul of all the people was grieved
every man for his sons and for his daughters but David
encouraged himself in the lord his God.
and David said to Abiathar the priest Ahimelech s son I pray
thee bring me hither the Ephod. and Abiathar brought thither
the Ephod to David.
and David enquired at the lord saying shall I pursue after
this troop? shall I overtake them? and he answered him
pursue for thou shalt surely overtake them and without fail
recover all.
so David went he and the six hundred men that were with him
and came to the brook Besor where those that were left behind
stayed.
but David pursued he and four hundred men for two hundred
abode behind which were so faint that they could not go over
the brook Besor.
and they found an Egyptian in the field and brought him to
David and gave him bread and he did eat and they made him
drink water
and they gave him a piece of a cake of figs and two clusters
of raisins and when he had eaten his spirit came again to
him for he had eaten no bread nor drunk any water three
days and three nights.
and David said unto him to whom belongest thou? and whence
art thou? and he said I Am a young man of Egypt servant to
an Amalekite and my Master left me because three days agone
I fell sick.
we made an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites and
upon the coast which belongeth to Judah and upon the south of
Caleb and we burned Ziklag with fire.
and David said to him canst thou bring me down to this
company? and he said swear unto me by God that thou wilt
Neither kill me nor deliver me into the hands of my Master
and I will bring thee down to this company.
and when he had brought him down behold they were spread
abroad upon all the earth eating and drinking and dancing
because of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the
land of the Philistines and out of the land of Judah.
and David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening
of the next day and there escaped not a man of them save
four hundred young men which rode upon camels and fled.
and David recovered all that the Amalekites had carried away
and David rescued his two wives.
and there was nothing lacking to them Neither small nor
great Neither sons nor daughters Neither spoil nor any
thing that they had taken to them David recovered all.
and David took all the flocks and the herds which they drave
before those other cattle and said this is David s spoil.
and David came to the two hundred men which were so faint
that they could not follow David whom they had made also to
abide at the brook Besor and they went forth to meet David
and to meet the people that were with him and when David came
near to the people he saluted them.
then answered all the wicked men and men of Belial of those
that went with David and said because they went not with us
we will not give them ought of the spoil that we have
recovered save to every man his wife and his children that
they may lead them away and depart.
then said David ye shall not do so my brethren with that
which the lord hath given us who hath preserved us and
delivered the company that came against us into our hand.
for who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as his part
is that goeth down to the battle so shall his part be that
tarrieth by the stuff they shall part alike.
and it was so from that day forward that he made it a statute
and an ordinance for Israel unto this day.
and when David came to Ziklag he sent of the spoil unto the
elders of Judah even to his friends saying behold a present
for you of the spoil of the enemies of the lord
to them which were in Bethel and to them which were in south
Ramoth and to them which were in Jattir
and to them which were in Aroer and to them which were in
Siphmoth and to them which were in Eshtemoa
and to them which were in Rachal and to them which were in
the cities of the Jerahmeelites and to them which were in the
cities of the Kenites
and to them which were in Hormah and to them which were in
Chorashan and to them which were in Athach
and to them which were in Hebron and to all the places where
David himself and his men were wont to haunt.
now the Philistines fought against Israel and the men of
Israel fled from before the Philistines and fell down slain
in mount Gilboa.
and the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons
and the Philistines slew Jonathan and Abinadab and
Melchishua Saul s sons.
and the battle went sore against Saul and the archers hit
him and he was sore wounded of the archers.
then said Saul unto his armourbearer draw thy sword and
thrust me through therewith lest these uncircumcised come and
thrust me through and abuse me. but his armourbearer would
not for he was sore afraid. therefore Saul took a sword and
fell upon it.
and when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead he fell
likewise upon his sword and died with him.
so Saul died and his three sons and his armourbearer and
all his men that same day together.
and when the men of Israel that were on the other side of the
valley and they that were on the other side Jordan saw that
the men of Israel fled and that Saul and his sons were dead
they forsook the cities and fled and the Philistines came
and dwelt in them.
and it came to pass on the morrow when the Philistines came
to strip the slain that they found Saul and his three sons
fallen in mount Gilboa.
and they cut off his head and stripped off his armour and
sent into the land of the Philistines round about to publish
it in the house of their idols and among the people.
and they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth and they
fastened his body to the wall of Bethshan.
and when the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead heard of that which
the Philistines had done to Saul
all the valiant men arose and went all night and took the
body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of
Bethshan and came to Jabesh and burnt them there.
and they took their bones and buried them under a tree at
Jabesh and fasted seven days.
now it came to pass after the death of Saul when David was
returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites and David had
abode two days in Ziklag
it came even to pass on the third day that behold a man
came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent and
earth upon his head and so it was when he came to David
that he fell to the earth and did obeisance.
and David said unto him from whence comest thou? and he said
unto him out of the camp of Israel Am I escaped.
and David said unto him how went the matter? I pray thee
tell me. and he answered that the people are fled from the
battle and many of the people also are fallen and dead and
Saul and Jonathan his son are dead also.
and David said unto the young man that told him how knowest
thou that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead?
and the young man that told him said as I happened by chance
upon mount Gilboa behold Saul leaned upon his spear and
lo the chariots and horsemen followed hard after him.
and when he looked behind him he saw me and called unto me.
and I answered here Am I.
and he said unto me who art thou? and I answered him I Am an
Amalekite.
he said unto me again stand I pray thee upon me and slay
me for anguish is come upon me because my life is yet whole
in me.
so I stood upon him and slew him because I was sure that he
could not live after that he was fallen and I took the crown
that was upon his head and the bracelet that was on his arm
and have brought them hither unto my lord.
then David took hold on his clothes and rent them and
likewise all the men that were with him
and they mourned and wept and fasted until even for Saul
and for Jonathan his son and for the people of the lord and
for the house of Israel because they were fallen by the
sword.
and David said unto the young man that told him whence art
thou? and he answered I Am the son of a stranger an
Amalekite.
and David said unto him how wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine hand to destroy the lord s anointed?
and David called one of the young men and said go near and
fall upon him. and he smote him that he died.
and David said unto him thy blood be upon thy head for thy
mouth hath testified against thee saying I have slain the
lord s anointed.
and David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over
Jonathan his son
 also he bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the
bow behold it is written in the book of Jasher.
the beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places how are
the Mighty fallen
tell it not in Gath publish it not in the streets of Askelon
lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice lest the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.
ye mountains of Gilboa let there be no dew Neither let there
be rain upon you nor fields of offerings for there the
shield of the Mighty is vilely cast away the shield of Saul
as though he had not been anointed with oil.
from the blood of the slain from the fat of the Mighty the
bow of Jonathan turned not back and the sword of Saul
returned not empty.
Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives and
in their death they were not divided they were swifter than
eagles they were stronger than lions.
ye daughters of Israel weep over Saul who clothed you in
scarlet with other delights who put on ornaments of gold
upon your apparel.
how are the Mighty fallen in the midst of the battle O
Jonathan thou wast slain in thine high places.
I Am distressed for thee my brother Jonathan very pleasant
hast thou been unto me thy love to me was wonderful passing
the love of women.
how are the Mighty fallen and the weapons of war perished
and it came to pass after this that David enquired of the
lord saying shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah?
and the lord said unto him go up. and David said whither
shall I go up? and he said unto Hebron.
so David went up thither and his two wives also Ahinoam the
Jezreelitess and Abigail Nabal s wife the Carmelite.
and his men that were with him did David bring up every man
with his household and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.
and the men of Judah came and there they anointed David king
over the house of Judah. and they told David saying that the
men of Jabeshgilead were they that buried Saul.
and David sent messengers unto the men of Jabeshgilead and
said unto them blessed be ye of the lord that ye have shewed
this kindness unto your lord even unto Saul and have buried
him.
and now the lord shew kindness and truth unto you and I also
will requite you this kindness because ye have done this
thing.
therefore now let your hands be strengthened and be ye
valiant for your Master Saul is dead and also the house of
Judah have anointed me king over them.
but Abner the son of Ner captain of Saul s host took
Ishbosheth the son of Saul and brought him over to Mahanaim
and made him king over Gilead and over the Ashurites and
over Jezreel and over Ephraim and over Benjamin and over
all Israel.
Ishbosheth Saul s son was forty years old when he began to
reign over Israel and reigned two years. but the house of
Judah followed David.
and the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of
Judah was seven years and six months.
and Abner the son of Ner and the servants of Ishbosheth the
son of Saul went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.
and Joab the son of Zeruiah and the servants of David went
out and met together by the pool of Gibeon and they sat
down the one on the one side of the pool and the other on
the other side of the pool.
and Abner said to Joab let the young men now Arise and play
before us. and Joab said let them Arise.
then there arose and went over by number twelve of Benjamin
which pertained to Ishbosheth the son of Saul and twelve of
the servants of David.
and they caught every one his fellow by the head and thrust
his sword in his fellow s side so they fell down together
wherefore that place was called Helkathhazzurim which is in
Gibeon.
and there was a very sore battle that day and Abner was
beaten and the men of Israel before the servants of David.
and there were three sons of Zeruiah there Joab and Abishai
and Asahel and Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.
and Asahel pursued after Abner and in going he turned not to
the right hand nor to the left from following Abner.
then Abner looked behind him and said art thou Asahel? and
he answered I Am.
and Abner said to him turn thee aside to thy right hand or to
thy left and lay thee hold on one of the young men and take
thee his armour. but Asahel would not turn aside from
following of him.
and Abner said again to Asahel turn thee aside from following
me wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then
should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother?
howbeit he refused to turn aside wherefore Abner with the
hinder end of the spear smote him under the fifth rib that
the spear came out behind him and he fell down there and
died in the same place and it came to pass that as many as
came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.
Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner and the sun went
down when they were come to the hill of Ammah that lieth
before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.
and the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together
after Abner and became one troop and stood on the top of an
hill.
then Abner called to Joab and said shall the sword devour
for ever? knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the
latter end? how long shall it be then ere thou bid the people
return from following their brethren?
and Joab said as God liveth unless thou hadst spoken surely
then in the morning the people had gone up every one from
following his brother.
so Joab blew a trumpet and all the people stood still and
pursued after Israel no more Neither fought they any more.
and Abner and his men walked all that night through the plain
and passed over Jordan and went through all Bithron and they
came to Mahanaim.
and Joab returned from following Abner and when he had
gathered all the people together there lacked of David s
servants nineteen men and Asahel.
but the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin and of
Abner s men so that three hundred and threescore men died.
and they took up Asahel and buried him in the sepulchre of
his father which was in Bethlehem. and Joab and his men went
all night and they came to Hebron at break of day.
now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house
of David but David waxed stronger and stronger and the house
of Saul waxed weaker and weaker.
and unto David were sons born in Hebron and his firstborn was
Amnon of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess
and his second Chileab of Abigail the wife of Nabal the
Carmelite and the third Absalom the son of Maacah the
daughter of Talmai king of Geshur
and the fourth Adonijah the son of Haggith and the fifth
Shephatiah the son of Abital
and the sixth Ithream by Eglah David s wife. these were born
to David in Hebron.
and it came to pass while there was war between the house of
Saul and the house of David that Abner made himself strong
for the house of Saul.
and Saul had a concubine whose name was Rizpah the daughter
of Aiah and Ishbosheth said to Abner wherefore hast thou
gone in unto my father s concubine?
then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ishbosheth and
said Am I a dog s head which against Judah do shew kindness
this day unto the house of Saul thy father to his brethren
and to his friends and have not delivered thee into the hand
of David that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning
this woman?
so do God to Abner and more also except as the lord hath
sworn to David even so I do to him
to translate the kingdom from the house of Saul and to set up
the throne of David over Israel and over Judah from Dan even
to Beersheba.
and he could not answer Abner a word again because he feared
him.
and Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf saying
whose is the land? saying also make thy league with me and
behold my hand shall be with thee to bring about all Israel
unto thee.
and he said well I will make a league with thee but one
thing I require of thee that is thou shalt not see my face
except thou first bring Michal Saul s daughter when thou
comest to see my face.
and David sent messengers to Ishbosheth Saul s son saying
deliver me my wife Michal which I espoused to me for an
hundred foreskins of the Philistines.
and Ishbosheth sent and took her from her husband even from
Phaltiel the son of Laish.
and her husband went with her along weeping behind her to
Bahurim. then said Abner unto him go return. and he
returned.
and Abner had communication with the elders of Israel saying
ye sought for David in times past to be king over you
now then do it for the lord hath spoken of David saying by
the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out
of the hand of the Philistines and out of the hand of all
their enemies.
and Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin and Abner went
also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed
good to Israel and that seemed good to the whole house of
Benjamin.
so Abner came to David to Hebron and twenty men with him. and
David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast.
and Abner said unto David I will Arise and go and will
gather all Israel unto my lord the king that they may make a
league with thee and that thou mayest reign over all that
thine heart desireth. and David sent Abner away and he went
in peace.
and behold the servants of David and Joab came from pursuing
a troop and brought in a great spoil with them but Abner was
not with David in Hebron for he had sent him away and he was
gone in peace.
when Joab and all the host that was with him were come they
told Joab saying Abner the son of Ner came to the king and
he hath sent him away and he is gone in peace.
then Joab came to the king and said what hast thou done?
behold Abner came unto thee why is it that thou hast sent
him away and he is quite gone?
thou knowest Abner the son of Ner that he came to deceive
thee and to know thy going out and thy coming in and to know
all that thou doest.
and when Joab was come out from David he sent messengers
after Abner which brought him again from the well of Sirah
but David knew it not.
and when Abner was returned to Hebron Joab took him aside in
the gate to speak with him quietly and smote him there under
the fifth rib that he died for the blood of Asahel his
brother.
and afterward when David heard it he said I and my kingdom
are guiltless before the lord for ever from the blood of Abner
the son of Ner
let it rest on the head of Joab and on all his father s
house and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that
hath an issue or that is a leper or that leaneth on a staff
or that falleth on the sword or that lacketh bread.
so Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner because he had
slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.
and David said to Joab and to all the people that were with
him rend your clothes and gird you with sackcloth and mourn
before Abner. and king David himself followed the bier.
and they buried Abner in Hebron and the king lifted up his
voice and wept at the grave of Abner and all the people
wept.
and the king lamented over Abner and said died Abner as a
fool dieth?
thy hands were not bound nor thy feet put into fetters as a
man falleth before wicked men so fellest thou. and all the
people wept again over him.
and when all the people came to cause David to eat meat while
it was yet day David sware saying so do God to me and more
also if I taste bread or ought else till the sun be down.
and all the people took notice of it and it pleased them as
whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.
for all the people and all Israel understood that day that it
was not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner.
and the king said unto his servants know ye not that there is
a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?
and I Am this day weak though anointed king and these men
the sons of Zeruiah be too hard for me the lord shall reward
the doer of evil according to his wickedness.
and when Saul s son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron his
hands were feeble and all the Israelites were troubled.
and Saul s son had two men that were captains of Bands the
name of the one was Baanah and the name of the other Rechab
the sons of Rimmon a Beerothite of the children of Benjamin
 for Beeroth also was reckoned to Benjamin.
and the Beerothites fled to Gittaim and were sojourners there
until this day.
and Jonathan Saul s son had a son that was lame of his feet.
he was five years old when the tidings came of Saul and
Jonathan out of Jezreel and his nurse took him up and fled
and it came to pass as she made haste to flee that he fell
and became lame. and his name was Mephibosheth.
and the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite Rechab and Baanah
went and came about the heat of the day to the house of
Ishbosheth who lay on a bed at noon.
and they came thither into the midst of the house as though
they would have fetched wheat and they smote him under the
fifth rib and Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.
for when they came into the house he lay on his bed in his
bedchamber and they smote him and slew him and beheaded
him and took his head and gat them away through the plain
all night.
and they brought the head of Ishbosheth unto David to Hebron
and said to the king behold the head of Ishbosheth the son of
Saul thine enemy which sought thy life and the lord hath
avenged my lord the king this day of Saul and of his seed.
and David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother the sons of
Rimmon the Beerothite and said unto them as the lord liveth
who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity
when one told me saying behold Saul is dead thinking to
have brought good tidings I took hold of him and slew him in
Ziklag who thought that I would have given him a reward for
his tidings
how Much more when wicked men have slain a righteous person
in his own house upon his bed? shall I not therefore now
require his blood of your hand and take you away from the
earth?
and David commanded his young men and they slew them and cut
off their hands and their feet and hanged them up over the
pool in Hebron. but they took the head of Ishbosheth and
buried it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.
then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron and
spake saying behold we are thy bone and thy flesh.
also in time past when Saul was king over us thou wast he
that leddest out and broughtest in Israel and the lord said
to thee thou shalt feed my people Israel and thou shalt be a
captain over Israel.
so all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron and
king David made a league with them in Hebron before the lord
and they anointed David king over Israel.
David was thirty years old when he began to reign and he
reigned forty years.
in Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months
and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all
Israel and Judah.
and the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites
the inhabitants of the land which spake unto David saying
except thou take away the blind and the lame thou shalt not
come in hither thinking David cannot come in hither.
nevertheless David took the strong hold of Zion the same is
the city of David.
and David said on that day whosoever getteth up to the
gutter and smiteth the Jebusites and the lame and the blind
that are hated of David s soul he shall be chief and captain.
wherefore they said the blind and the lame shall not come
into the house.
so David dwelt in the fort and called it the city of David.
and David built round about from Millo and inward.
and David went on and grew great and the lord God of hosts
was with him.
and Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David and cedar
trees and carpenters and masons and they built David an
house.
and David perceived that the lord had established him king
over Israel and that he had exalted his kingdom for his
people Israel s sake.
and David took him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem
after he was come from Hebron and there were yet sons and
daughters born to David.
and these be the names of those that were born unto him in
Jerusalem Shammuah and Shobab and Nathan and Solomon
Ibhar also and Elishua and Nepheg and Japhia
and Elishama and Eliada and Eliphalet.
but when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David
king over Israel all the Philistines came up to seek David
and David heard of it and went down to the hold.
the Philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley
of Rephaim.
and David enquired of the lord saying shall I go up to the
Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? and the
lord said unto David go up for I will doubtless deliver the
Philistines into thine hand.
and David came to Baalperazim and David smote them there and
said the lord hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me
as the breach of waters. therefore he called the name of that
place Baalperazim.
and there they left their images and David and his men burned
them.
and the Philistines came up yet again and spread themselves
in the valley of Rephaim.
and when David enquired of the lord he said thou shalt not
go up but fetch a compass behind them and come upon them
over against the mulberry trees.
and let it be when thou hearest the sound of a going in the
tops of the mulberry trees that then thou shalt bestir
thyself for then shall the lord go out before thee to smite
the host of the Philistines.
and David did so as the lord had commanded him and smote the
Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer.
again David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel
thirty thousand.
and David arose and went with all the people that were with
him from Baale of Judah to bring up from thence the ark of
God whose name is called by the name of the lord of hosts
that dwelleth between the Cherubims.
and they set the ark of God upon a new cart and brought it
out of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah and Uzzah and
Ahio the sons of Abinadab drave the new cart.
and they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at
Gibeah accompanying the ark of God and Ahio went before the
ark.
and David and all the house of Israel played before the lord
on all manner of instruments made of fir wood even on harps
and on psalteries and on timbrels and on cornets and on
cymbals.
and when they came to Nachon s threshingfloor Uzzah put forth
his hand to the ark of God and took hold of it for the oxen
shook it.
and the anger of the lord was kindled against Uzzah and God
smote him there for his error and there he died by the ark of
God.
and David was displeased because the lord had made a breach
upon Uzzah and he called the name of the place Perezuzzah to
this day.
and David was afraid of the lord that day and said how shall
the ark of the lord come to me?
so David would not remove the ark of the lord unto him into
the city of David but David carried it aside into the house
of Obededom the Gittite.
and the ark of the lord continued in the house of Obededom the
Gittite three months and the lord blessed Obededom and all
his household.
and it was told king David saying the lord hath blessed the
house of Obededom and all that pertaineth unto him because
of the ark of God. so David went and brought up the ark of God
from the house of Obededom into the city of David with
gladness.
and it was so that when they that bare the ark of the lord
had gone six paces he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.
and David danced before the lord with all his might and David
was girded with a linen Ephod.
so David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the
lord with shouting and with the sound of the trumpet.
and as the ark of the lord came into the city of David Michal
Saul s daughter looked through a window and saw king David
leaping and dancing before the lord and she despised him in
her heart.
and they brought in the ark of the lord and set it in his
place in the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched
for it and David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings
before the lord.
and as soon as David had made an end of offering burnt
offerings and peace offerings he blessed the people in the
name of the lord of hosts.
and he dealt among all the people even among the whole
multitude of Israel as well to the women as men to every one
a cake of bread and a good piece of flesh and a flagon of
wine. so all the people departed every one to his house.
then David returned to bless his household. and Michal the
daughter of Saul came out to meet David and said how
glorious was the king of Israel to day who uncovered himself
to day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants as one of
the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself
and David said unto Michal it was before the lord which
chose me before thy father and before all his house to
appoint me ruler over the people of the lord over Israel
therefore will I play before the lord.
and I will yet be more vile than thus and will be base in
mine own sight and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken
of of them shall I be had in honour.
therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the
day of her death.
and it came to pass when the king sat in his house and the
lord had given him rest round about from all his enemies
that the king said unto Nathan the prophet see now I dwell
in an house of cedar but the ark of God dwelleth within
curtains.
and Nathan said to the king go do all that is in thine
heart for the lord is with thee.
and it came to pass that night that the word of the lord came
unto Nathan saying
go and tell my servant David thus saith the lord shalt thou
build me an house for me to dwell in?
whereas I have not dwelt in any house since the time that I
brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt even to this
day but have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle.
in all the places wherein I have walked with all the children
of Israel spake I a word with any of the tribes of Israel
whom I commanded to feed my people Israel saying why build
ye not me an house of cedar?
now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant David thus
saith the lord of hosts I took thee from the sheepcote from
following the sheep to be ruler over my people over Israel
and I was with thee whithersoever thou wentest and have cut
off all thine enemies out of thy sight and have made thee a
great name like unto the name of the great men that are in
the earth.
moreover I will appoint a place for my people Israel and will
plant them that they may dwell in a place of their own and
move no more Neither shall the children of wickedness afflict
them any more as beforetime
and as since the time that I commanded judges to be over my
people Israel and have caused thee to rest from all thine
enemies. also the lord telleth thee that he will make thee an
house.
and when thy days be fulfilled and thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers I will set up thy seed after thee which shall
proceed out of thy bowels and I will establish his kingdom.
he shall build an house for my name and I will stablish the
throne of his kingdom for ever.
I will be his father and he shall be my son. if he commit
iniquity I will chasten him with the rod of men and with the
stripes of the children of men
but my mercy shall not depart away from him as I took it from
Saul whom I put away before thee.
and thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever
before thee thy throne shall be established for ever.
according to all these words and according to all this
vision so did Nathan speak unto David.
then went king David in and sat before the lord and he said
who Am I O lord God? and what is my house that thou hast
brought me hitherto?
and this was yet a small thing in thy sight O lord God but
thou hast spoken also of thy servant s house for a great while
to come. and is this the manner of man O lord God?
and what can David say more unto thee? for thou lord God
knowest thy servant.
for thy word s sake and according to thine own heart hast
thou done all these great things to make thy servant know
them.
wherefore thou art great O lord God for there is none like
thee Neither is there any God beside thee according to all
that we have heard with our ears.
and what one nation in the earth is like thy people even like
Israel whom God went to redeem for a people to himself and
to make him a name and to do for you great things and
terrible for thy land before thy people which thou
redeemedst to thee from Egypt from the nations and their
gods?
for thou hast confirmed to thyself thy people Israel to be a
people unto thee for ever and thou lord art become their
God.
and now O lord God the word that thou hast spoken concerning
thy servant and concerning his house establish it for ever
and do as thou hast said.
and let thy name be magnified for ever saying the lord of
hosts is the God over Israel and let the house of thy servant
David be established before thee.
for thou O lord of hosts God of Israel hast revealed to thy
servant saying I will build thee an house therefore hath
thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.
and now O lord God thou art that God and thy words be true
and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant
therefore now let it please thee to bless the house of thy
servant that it may continue for ever before thee for thou
O lord God hast spoken it and with thy blessing let the
house of thy servant be blessed for ever.
and after this it came to pass that David smote the
Philistines and subdued them and David took Methegammah out
of the hand of the Philistines.
and he smote Moab and measured them with a line casting them
down to the ground even with two lines measured he to put to
death and with one full line to keep alive. and so the
Moabites became David s servants and brought gifts.
David smote also Hadadezer the son of Rehob king of Zobah
as he went to recover his border at the river Euphrates.
and David took from him a thousand chariots and seven hundred
horsemen and twenty thousand footmen and David houghed all
the chariot horses but reserved of them for an hundred
chariots.
and when the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer
king of Zobah David slew of the Syrians two and twenty
thousand men.
then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus and the Syrians
became servants to David and brought gifts. and the lord
preserved David whithersoever he went.
and David took the shields of gold that were on the servants
of Hadadezer and brought them to Jerusalem.
and from Betah and from Berothai cities of Hadadezer king
David took exceeding Much brass.
when Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the
host of Hadadezer
then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David to salute him
and to bless him because he had fought against Hadadezer and
smitten him for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. and Joram
brought with him vessels of Silver and vessels of gold and
vessels of brass
which also king David did dedicate unto the lord with the
Silver and gold that he had dedicated of all nations which he
subdued
of Syria and of Moab and of the children of Ammon and of
the Philistines and of Amalek and of the spoil of Hadadezer
son of Rehob king of Zobah.
and David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the
Syrians in the valley of salt being eighteen thousand men.
and he put garrisons in Edom throughout all Edom put he
garrisons and all they of Edom became David s servants. and
the lord preserved David whithersoever he went.
and David reigned over all Israel and David executed judgment
and justice unto all his people.
and Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host and Jehoshaphat
the son of Ahilud was recorder
and Zadok the son of Ahitub and Ahimelech the son of
Abiathar were the priests and Seraiah was the scribe
and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over both the Cherethites
and the Pelethites and David s sons were chief rulers.
and David said is there yet any that is left of the house of
Saul that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan s sake?
and there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was
Ziba. and when they had called him unto David the king said
unto him art thou Ziba? and he said thy servant is he.
and the king said is there not yet any of the house of Saul
that I may shew the kindness of God unto him? and Ziba said
unto the king Jonathan hath yet a son which is lame on his
feet.
and the king said unto him where is he? and Ziba said unto
the king behold he is in the house of Machir the son of
Ammiel in Lodebar.
then king David sent and fetched him out of the house of
Machir the son of Ammiel from Lodebar.
now when Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan the son of Saul
was come unto David he fell on his face and did reverence.
and David said Mephibosheth. and he answered behold thy
servant
and David said unto him fear not for I will surely shew thee
kindness for Jonathan thy father s sake and will restore thee
all the land of Saul thy father and thou shalt eat bread at
my table continually.
and he bowed himself and said what is thy servant that thou
shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I Am?
then the king called to Ziba Saul s servant and said unto
him I have given unto thy Master s son all that pertained to
Saul and to all his house.
thou therefore and thy sons and thy servants shall till the
land for him and thou shalt bring in the fruits that thy
Master s son may have food to eat but Mephibosheth thy
Master s son shall eat bread alway at my table. now Ziba had
fifteen sons and twenty servants.
then said Ziba unto the king according to all that my lord
the king hath commanded his servant so shall thy servant do.
as for Mephibosheth said the king he shall eat at my table
as one of the king s sons.
and Mephibosheth had a young son whose name was Micha. and
all that dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants unto
Mephibosheth.
so Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem for he did eat continually
at the king s table and was lame on both his feet.
and it came to pass after this that the king of the children
of Ammon died and Hanun his son reigned in his stead.
then said David I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of
Nahash as his father shewed kindness unto me. and David sent
to comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father. and
David s servants came into the land of the children of Ammon.
and the princes of the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their
lord thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father that he
hath sent comforters unto thee? hath not David rather sent his
servants unto thee to search the city and to spy it out and
to overthrow it?
wherefore Hanun took David s servants and shaved off the one
half of their beards and cut off their garments in the
middle even to their buttocks and sent them away.
when they told it unto David he sent to meet them because
the men were greatly ashamed and the king said tarry at
Jericho until your beards be grown and then return.
and when the children of Ammon saw that they stank before
David the children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of
Bethrehob and the Syrians of Zoba twenty thousand footmen
and of king Maacah a thousand men and of Ishtob twelve
thousand men.
and when David heard of it he sent Joab and all the host of
the Mighty men.
and the children of Ammon came out and put the battle in
array at the entering in of the gate and the Syrians of Zoba
and of Rehob and Ishtob and Maacah were by themselves in
the field.
when Joab saw that the front of the battle was against him
before and behind he chose of all the choice men of Israel
and put them in array against the Syrians
and the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of
Abishai his brother that he might put them in array against
the children of Ammon.
and he said if the Syrians be too strong for me then thou
shalt help me but if the children of Ammon be too strong for
thee then I will come and help thee.
be of good courage and let us play the men for our people
and for the cities of our God and the lord do that which
seemeth him good.
and Joab drew nigh and the people that were with him unto
the battle against the Syrians and they fled before him.
and when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled
then fled they also before Abishai and entered into the city.
so Joab returned from the children of Ammon and came to
Jerusalem.
and when the Syrians saw that they were smitten before Israel
they gathered themselves together.
and Hadarezer sent and brought out the Syrians that were
beyond the river and they came to Helam and Shobach the
captain of the host of Hadarezer went before them.
and when it was told David he gathered all Israel together
and passed over Jordan and came to Helam. and the Syrians set
themselves in array against David and fought with him.
and the Syrians fled before Israel and David slew the men of
seven hundred chariots of the Syrians and forty thousand
horsemen and smote Shobach the captain of their host who
died there.
and when all the kings that were servants to Hadarezer saw
that they were smitten before Israel they made peace with
Israel and served them. so the Syrians feared to help the
children of Ammon any more.
and it came to pass after the year was expired at the time
when kings go forth to battle that David sent Joab and his
servants with him and all Israel and they destroyed the
children of Ammon and besieged Rabbah. but David tarried
still at Jerusalem.
and it came to pass in an eveningtide that David arose from
off his bed and walked upon the roof of the king s house and
from the roof he saw a woman washing herself and the woman
was very beautiful to look upon.
and David sent and enquired after the woman. and one said is
not this Bathsheba the daughter of Eliam the wife of Uriah
the Hittite?
and David sent messengers and took her and she came in unto
him and he lay with her for she was purified from her
uncleanness and she returned unto her house.
and the woman conceived and sent and told David and said I
Am with child.
and David sent to Joab saying send me Uriah the Hittite. and
Joab sent Uriah to David.
and when Uriah was come unto him David demanded of him how
Joab did and how the people did and how the war prospered.
and David said to Uriah go down to thy house and wash thy
feet. and Uriah departed out of the king s house and there
followed him a mess of meat from the king.
but Uriah slept at the door of the king s house with all the
servants of his lord and went not down to his house.
and when they had told David saying Uriah went not down unto
his house David said unto Uriah camest thou not from thy
journey? why then didst thou not go down unto thine house?
and Uriah said unto David the ark and Israel and Judah
abide in tents and my lord Joab and the servants of my lord
are encamped in the open fields shall I then go into mine
house to eat and to drink and to lie with my wife? as thou
livest and as thy soul liveth I will not do this thing.
and David said to Uriah tarry here to day also and to morrow
I will let thee depart. so Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day
and the morrow.
and when David had called him he did eat and drink before
him and he made him drunk and at even he went out to lie on
his bed with the servants of his lord but went not down to
his house.
and it came to pass in the morning that David wrote a letter
to Joab and sent it by the hand of Uriah.
and he wrote in the letter saying set ye Uriah in the
forefront of the hottest battle and retire ye from him that
he may be smitten and die.
and it came to pass when Joab observed the city that he
assigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men
were.
and the men of the city went out and fought with Joab and
there fell some of the people of the servants of David and
Uriah the Hittite died also.
then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the
war
and charged the messenger saying when thou hast made an end
of telling the matters of the war unto the king
and if so be that the king s wrath Arise and he say unto
thee wherefore approached ye so nigh unto the city when ye
did fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall?
who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? did not a woman
cast a piece of a millstone upon him from the wall that he
died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then say thou thy
servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.
so the messenger went and came and shewed David all that Joab
had sent him for.
and the messenger said unto David surely the men prevailed
against us and came out unto us into the field and we were
upon them even unto the entering of the gate.
and the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants and
some of the king s servants be dead and thy servant Uriah the
Hittite is dead also.
then David said unto the messenger thus shalt thou say unto
Joab let not this thing displease thee for the sword
devoureth one as well as another make thy battle more strong
against the city and overthrow it and encourage thou him.
and when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was
dead she mourned for her husband.
and when the mourning was past David sent and fetched her to
his house and she became his wife and bare him a son. but
the thing that David had done displeased the lord.
and the lord sent Nathan unto David. and he came unto him and
said unto him there were two men in one city the one rich
and the other poor.
the rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds
but the poor man had nothing save one little ewe lamb which
he had bought and nourished up and it grew up together with
him and with his children it did eat of his own meat and
drank of his own cup and lay in his bosom and was unto him
as a daughter.
and there came a traveller unto the rich man and he spared to
take of his own flock and of his own herd to dress for the
wayfaring man that was come unto him but took the poor man s
lamb and dressed it for the man that was come to him.
and David s anger was greatly kindled against the man and he
said to Nathan as the lord liveth the man that hath done
this thing shall surely die
and he shall restore the lamb fourfold because he did this
thing and because he had no pity.
and Nathan said to David thou art the man. thus saith the
lord God of Israel I anointed thee king over Israel and I
delivered thee out of the hand of Saul
and I gave thee thy Master s house and thy Master s wives
into thy bosom and gave thee the house of Israel and of
Judah and if that had been too little I would moreover have
given unto thee such and such things.
wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the lord to
do evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with
the sword and hast taken his wife to be thy wife and hast
slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon.
now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house
because thou hast despised me and hast taken the wife of
Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife.
thus saith the lord behold I will raise up evil against thee
out of thine own house and I will take thy wives before thine
eyes and give them unto thy neighbour and he shall lie with
thy wives in the sight of this sun.
for thou didst it secretly but I will do this thing before
all Israel and before the sun.
and David said unto Nathan I have sinned against the lord.
and Nathan said unto David the lord also hath put away thy
Sin thou shalt not die.
howbeit because by this deed thou hast given great occasion
to the enemies of the lord to blaspheme the child also that
is born unto thee shall surely die.
and Nathan departed unto his house. and the lord struck the
child that Uriah s wife bare unto David and it was very sick.
David therefore besought God for the child and David fasted
and went in and lay all night upon the earth.
and the elders of his house arose and went to him to raise
him up from the earth but he would not Neither did he eat
bread with them.
and it came to pass on the seventh day that the child died.
and the servants of David feared to tell him that the child
was dead for they said behold while the child was yet
alive we spake unto him and he would not hearken unto our
voice how will he then vex himself if we tell him that the
child is dead?
but when David saw that his servants whispered David
perceived that the child was dead therefore David said unto
his servants is the child dead? and they said he is dead.
then David arose from the earth and washed and anointed
himself and changed his apparel and came into the house of
the lord and worshipped then he came to his own house and
when he required they set bread before him and he did eat.
then said his servants unto him what thing is this that thou
hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child while it
was alive but when the child was dead thou didst rise and
eat bread.
and he said while the child was yet alive I fasted and wept
for I said who can tell whether God will be gracious to me
that the child may live?
but now he is dead wherefore should I fast? can I bring him
back again? I shall go to him but he shall not return to me.
and David comforted Bathsheba his wife and went in unto her
and lay with her and she bare a son and he called his name
Solomon and the lord loved him.
and he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet and he called
his name Jedidiah because of the lord.
and Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon and
took the royal city.
and Joab sent messengers to David and said I have fought
against Rabbah and have taken the city of waters.
now therefore gather the rest of the people together and
encamp against the city and take it lest I take the city
and it be called after my name.
and David gathered all the people together and went to
Rabbah and fought against it and took it.
and he took their king s crown from off his head the weight
whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones and it
was set on David s head. and he brought forth the spoil of the
city in great abundance.
and he brought forth the people that were therein and put
them under saws and under harrows of Iron and under axes of
Iron and made them pass through the brick-kiln and thus did
he unto all the cities of the children of Ammon. so David and
all the people returned unto Jerusalem.
and it came to pass after this that Absalom the son of David
had a fair sister whose name was Tamar and Amnon the son of
David loved her.
and Amnon was so vexed that he fell sick for his sister
Tamar for she was a virgin and Amnon thought it hard for him
to do anything to her.
but Amnon had a friend whose name was Jonadab the son of
Shimeah David s brother and Jonadab was a very subtil man.
and he said unto him why art thou being the king s son lean
from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? and Amnon said unto
him I love Tamar my brother Absalom s sister.
and Jonadab said unto him lay thee down on thy bed and make
thyself sick and when thy father cometh to see thee say unto
him I pray thee let my sister Tamar come and give me meat
and dress the meat in my sight that I may see it and eat it
at her hand.
so Amnon lay down and made himself sick and when the king
was come to see him Amnon said unto the king I pray thee
let Tamar my sister come and make me a couple of cakes in my
sight that I may eat at her hand.
then David sent home to Tamar saying go now to thy brother
Amnon s house and dress him meat.
so Tamar went to her brother Amnon s house and he was laid
down. and she took flour and kneaded it and made cakes in
his sight and did bake the cakes.
and she took a pan and poured them out before him but he
refused to eat. and Amnon said have out all men from me. and
they went out every man from him.
and Amnon said unto Tamar bring the meat into the chamber
that I may eat of thine hand. and Tamar took the cakes which
she had made and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her
brother.
and when she had brought them unto him to eat he took hold of
her and said unto her come lie with me my sister.
and she answered him nay my brother do not force me for no
such thing ought to be done in Israel do not thou this folly.
and I whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee
thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. now therefore I
pray thee speak unto the king for he will not withhold me
from thee.
howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice but being
stronger than she forced her and lay with her.
then Amnon hated her exceedingly so that the hatred wherewith
he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved
her. and Amnon said unto her Arise be gone.
and she said unto him there is no cause this evil in sending
me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. but
he would not hearken unto her.
then he called his servant that ministered unto him and said
put now this woman out from me and bolt the door after her.
and she had a garment of divers colours upon her for with
such robes were the king s daughters that were virgins
apparelled. then his servant brought her out and bolted the
door after her.
and Tamar put ashes on her head and rent her garment of
divers colours that was on her and laid her hand on her head
and went on crying.
and Absalom her brother said unto her hath Amnon thy brother
been with thee? but hold now thy peace my sister he is thy
brother regard not this thing. so Tamar remained desolate in
her brother Absalom s house.
but when king David heard of all these things he was very
wroth.
and Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon Neither good nor bad
for Absalom hated Amnon because he had forced his sister
Tamar.
and it came to pass after two full years that Absalom had
sheepshearers in Baalhazor which is beside Ephraim and
Absalom invited all the king s sons.
and Absalom came to the king and said behold now thy
servant hath sheepshearers let the king I beseech thee and
his servants go with thy servant.
and the king said to Absalom nay my son let us not all now
go lest we be chargeable unto thee. and he pressed him
howbeit he would not go but blessed him.
then said Absalom if not I pray thee let my brother Amnon
go with us. and the king said unto him why should he go with
thee?
but Absalom pressed him that he let Amnon and all the king s
sons go with him.
now Absalom had commanded his servants saying Mark ye now
when Amnon s heart is merry with wine and when I say unto
you smite Amnon then kill him fear not have not I
commanded you? be courageous and be valiant.
and the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had
commanded. then all the king s sons arose and every man gat
him up upon his mule and fled.
and it came to pass while they were in the way that tidings
came to David saying Absalom hath slain all the king s sons
and there is not one of them left.
then the king arose and tare his garments and lay on the
earth and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent.
and Jonadab the son of Shimeah David s brother answered and
said let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the
young men the king s sons for Amnon only is dead for by the
appointment of Absalom this hath been determined from the day
that he forced his sister Tamar.
now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his
heart to think that all the king s sons are dead for Amnon
only is dead.
but Absalom fled. and the young man that kept the watch lifted
up his eyes and looked and behold there came Much people
by the way of the hill side behind him.
and Jonadab said unto the king behold the king s sons come
as thy servant said so it is.
and it came to pass as soon as he had made an end of
speaking that behold the king s sons came and lifted up
their voice and wept and the king also and all his servants
wept very sore.
but Absalom fled and went to Talmai the son of Ammihud king
of Geshur. and David mourned for his son every day.
so Absalom fled and went to Geshur and was there three
years.
and the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom
for he was comforted concerning Amnon seeing he was dead.
now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king s heart
was toward Absalom.
and Joab sent to Tekoah and fetched thence a wise woman and
said unto her I pray thee feign thyself to be a mourner and
put on now mourning apparel and anoint not thyself with oil
but be as a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead
and come to the king and speak on this manner unto him. so
Joab put the words in her mouth.
and when the woman of Tekoah spake to the king she fell on
her face to the ground and did obeisance and said help O
king.
and the king said unto her what aileth thee? and she
answered I Am indeed a widow woman and mine husband is dead.
and thy handmaid had two sons and they two strove together in
the field and there was none to part them but the one smote
the other and slew him.
and behold the whole family is risen against thine handmaid
and they said deliver him that smote his brother that we may
kill him for the life of his brother whom he slew and we
will destroy the heir also and so they shall quench my coal
which is left and shall not leave to my husband Neither name
nor remainder upon the earth.
and the king said unto the woman go to thine house and I
will give charge concerning thee.
and the woman of Tekoah said unto the king my lord O king
the iniquity be on me and on my father s house and the king
and his throne be guiltless.
and the king said whoever saith ought unto thee bring him to
me and he shall not touch thee any more.
then said she I pray thee let the king remember the lord thy
God that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to
destroy any more lest they destroy my son. and he said as
the lord liveth there shall not one hair of thy son fall to
the earth.
then the woman said let thine handmaid I pray thee speak
one word unto my lord the king. and he said say on.
and the woman said wherefore then hast thou thought such a
thing against the people of God? for the king doth speak this
thing as one which is faulty in that the king doth not fetch
home again his banished.
for we must needs die and are as water spilt on the ground
which cannot be gathered up again Neither doth God respect
any person yet doth he devise means that his banished be not
expelled from him.
now therefore that I Am come to speak of this thing unto my
lord the king it is because the people have made me afraid
and thy handmaid said I will now speak unto the king it may
be that the king will perform the request of his handmaid.
for the king will hear to deliver his handmaid out of the
hand of the man that would destroy me and my son together out
of the inheritance of God.
then thine handmaid said the word of my lord the king shall
now be comfortable for as an angel of God so is my lord the
king to discern good and bad therefore the lord thy God will
be with thee.
then the king answered and said unto the woman hide not from
me I pray thee the thing that I shall ask thee. and the
woman said let my lord the king now speak.
and the king said is not the hand of Joab with thee in all
this? and the woman answered and said as thy soul liveth my
lord the king none can turn to the right hand or to the left
from ought that my lord the king hath spoken for thy servant
Joab he bade me and he put all these words in the mouth of
thine handmaid
to fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant Joab done
this thing and my lord is wise according to the wisdom of an
angel of God to know all things that are in the earth.
and the king said unto Joab behold now I have done this
thing go therefore bring the young man Absalom again.
and Joab fell to the ground on his face and bowed himself
and thanked the king and Joab said to day thy servant
knoweth that I have found grace in thy sight my lord O king
in that the king hath fulfilled the request of his servant.
so Joab arose and went to Geshur and brought Absalom to
Jerusalem.
and the king said let him turn to his own house and let him
not see my face. so Absalom returned to his own house and saw
not the king s face.
but in all Israel there was none to be so Much praised as
Absalom for his beauty from the sole of his foot even to the
crown of his head there was no blemish in him.
and when he polled his head for it was at every year s end
that he polled it because the hair was heavy on him
therefore he polled it he weighed the hair of his head at
two hundred shekels after the king s weight.
and unto Absalom there were born three sons and one daughter
whose name was Tamar she was a woman of a fair countenance.
so Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem and saw not the
king s face.
therefore Absalom sent for Joab to have sent him to the king
but he would not come to him and when he sent again the
second time he would not come.
therefore he said unto his servants see Joab s field is near
mine and he hath barley there go and set it on fire. and
Absalom s servants set the field on fire.
then Joab arose and came to Absalom unto his house and said
unto him wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?
and Absalom answered Joab behold I sent unto thee saying
come hither that I may send thee to the king to say
wherefore Am I come from Geshur? it had been good for me to
have been there still now therefore let me see the king s
face and if there be any iniquity in me let him kill me.
so Joab came to the king and told him and when he had called
for Absalom he came to the king and bowed himself on his
face to the ground before the king and the king kissed
Absalom.
and it came to pass after this that Absalom prepared him
chariots and horses and fifty men to run before him.
and Absalom rose up early and stood beside the way of the
gate and it was so that when any man that had a controversy
came to the king for judgment then Absalom called unto him
and said of what city art thou? and he said thy servant is
of one of the tribes of Israel.
and Absalom said unto him see thy matters are good and
right but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.
Absalom said moreover oh that I were made judge in the land
that every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto
me and I would do him justice
and it was so that when any man came nigh to him to do him
obeisance he put forth his hand and took him and kissed
him.
and on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the
king for judgment so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of
Israel.
and it came to pass after forty years that Absalom said unto
the king I pray thee let me go and pay my vow which I have
vowed unto the lord in Hebron.
for thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria
saying if the lord shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem
then I will serve the lord.
and the king said unto him go in peace. so he arose and went
to Hebron.
but Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel
saying as soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet then ye
shall say Absalom reigneth in Hebron.
and with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem that
were called and they went in their simplicity and they knew
not any thing.
and Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite David s
counsellor from his city even from Giloh while he offered
sacrifices. and the conspiracy was strong for the people
increased continually with Absalom.
and there came a messenger to David saying the hearts of the
men of Israel are after Absalom.
and David said unto all his servants that were with him at
Jerusalem Arise and let us flee for we shall not else
escape from Absalom make speed to depart lest he overtake us
suddenly and bring evil upon us and smite the city with the
edge of the sword.
and the king s servants said unto the king behold thy
servants are ready to do whatsoever my lord the king shall
appoint.
and the king went forth and all his household after him. and
the king left Ten women which were concubines to keep the
house.
and the king went forth and all the people after him and
tarried in a place that was far off.
and all his servants passed on beside him and all the
Cherethites and all the Pelethites and all the Gittites six
hundred men which came after him from Gath passed on before
the king.
then said the king to Ittai the Gittite wherefore goest thou
also with us? return to thy place and abide with the king
for thou art a stranger and also an exile.
whereas thou camest but yesterday should I this day make thee
go up and down with us? seeing I go whither I may return
thou and take back thy brethren mercy and truth be with
thee.
and Ittai answered the king and said as the lord liveth and
as my lord the king liveth surely in what place my lord the
king shall be whether in death or life even there also will
thy servant be.
and David said to Ittai go and pass over. and Ittai the
Gittite passed over and all his men and all the little ones
that were with him.
and all the country wept with a loud voice and all the people
passed over the king also himself passed over the brook
Kidron and all the people passed over toward the way of the
wilderness.
and lo Zadok also and all the Levites were with him bearing
the ark of the covenant of God and they set down the ark of
God and Abiathar went up until all the people had done
passing out of the city.
and the king said unto Zadok carry back the ark of God into
the city if I shall find favour in the eyes of the lord he
will bring me again and shew me both it and his habitation
but if he thus say I have no delight in thee behold here Am
I let him do to me as seemeth good unto him.
the king said also unto Zadok the priest art not thou a seer?
return into the city in peace and your two sons with you
Ahimaaz thy son and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.
see I will tarry in the plain of the wilderness until there
come word from you to certify me.
Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to
Jerusalem and they tarried there.
and David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet and wept as
he went up and had his head covered and he went barefoot
and all the people that was with him covered every man his
head and they went up weeping as they went up.
and one told David saying Ahithophel is among the
conspirators with Absalom. and David said O lord I pray
thee turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.
and it came to pass that when David was come to the top of
the mount where he worshipped God behold Hushai the Archite
came to meet him with his coat rent and earth upon his head
unto whom David said if thou passest on with me then thou
shalt be a burden unto me
but if thou return to the city and say unto Absalom I will
be thy servant O king as I have been thy father s servant
hitherto so will I now also be thy servant then mayest thou
for me defeat the counsel of Ahithophel.
and hast thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the
priests? therefore it shall be that what thing soever thou
shalt hear out of the king s house thou shalt tell it to
Zadok and Abiathar the priests.
behold they have there with them their two sons Ahimaaz
Zadok s son and Jonathan Abiathar s son and by them ye shall
send unto me every thing that ye can hear.
so Hushai David s friend came into the city and Absalom came
into Jerusalem.
and when David was a little past the top of the hill behold
Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him with a couple of
asses saddled and upon them two hundred loaves of bread and
an hundred bunches of raisins and an hundred of summer
fruits and a bottle of wine.
and the king said unto Ziba what meanest thou by these? and
Ziba said the asses be for the king s household to ride on
and the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat and
the wine that such as be faint in the wilderness may drink.
and the king said and where is thy Master s son? and Ziba
said unto the king behold he abideth at Jerusalem for he
said to day shall the house of Israel restore me the kingdom
of my father.
then said the king to Ziba behold thine are all that
pertained unto Mephibosheth. and Ziba said I humbly beseech
thee that I may find grace in thy sight my lord O king.
and when king David came to Bahurim behold thence came out a
man of the family of the house of Saul whose name was Shimei
the son of Gera he came forth and cursed still as he came.
and he cast stones at David and at all the servants of king
David and all the people and all the Mighty men were on his
right hand and on his left.
and thus said Shimei when he cursed come out come out thou
bloody man and thou man of Belial
the lord hath returned upon thee all the blood of the house of
Saul in whose stead thou hast reigned and the lord hath
delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son and
behold thou art taken in thy mischief because thou art a
bloody man.
then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king why should
this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over I pray
thee and take off his head.
and the king said what have I to do with you ye sons of
Zeruiah? so let him curse because the lord hath said unto
him curse David. who shall then say wherefore hast thou done
so?
and David said to Abishai and to all his servants behold my
son which came forth of my bowels seeketh my life how Much
more now may this Benjamite do it? let him alone and let him
curse for the lord hath bidden him.
it may be that the lord will look on mine affliction and that
the lord will requite me good for his cursing this day.
and as David and his men went by the way Shimei went along on
the hill s side over against him and cursed as he went and
threw stones at him and cast dust.
and the king and all the people that were with him came
weary and refreshed themselves there.
and Absalom and all the people the men of Israel came to
Jerusalem and Ahithophel with him.
and it came to pass when Hushai the Archite David s friend
was come unto Absalom that Hushai said unto Absalom God save
the king God save the king.
and Absalom said to Hushai is this thy kindness to thy
friend? why wentest thou not with thy friend?
and Hushai said unto Absalom nay but whom the lord and this
people and all the men of Israel choose his will I be and
with him will I abide.
and again whom should I serve? should I not serve in the
presence of his son? as I have served in thy father s
presence so will I be in thy presence.
then said Absalom to Ahithophel give counsel among you what
we shall do.
and Ahithophel said unto Absalom go in unto thy father s
concubines which he hath left to keep the house and all
Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy father then
shall the hands of all that are with thee be strong.
so they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house and
Absalom went in unto his father s concubines in the sight of
all Israel.
and the counsel of Ahithophel which he counselled in those
days was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God so
was all the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with
Absalom.
moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom let me now choose out
twelve thousand men and I will Arise and pursue after David
this night
and I will come upon him while he is weary and weak handed
and will make him afraid and all the people that are with him
shall flee and I will smite the king only
and I will bring back all the people unto thee the man whom
thou seekest is as if all returned so all the people shall be
in peace.
and the saying pleased Absalom well and all the elders of
Israel.
then said Absalom call now Hushai the Archite also and let
us hear likewise what he saith.
and when Hushai was come to Absalom Absalom spake unto him
saying Ahithophel hath spoken after this manner shall we do
after his saying? if not speak thou.
and Hushai said unto Absalom the counsel that Ahithophel hath
given is not good at this time.
for said Hushai thou knowest thy father and his men that
they be Mighty men and they be chafed in their minds as a
bear robbed of her whelps in the field and thy father is a
man of war and will not lodge with the people.
behold he is hid now in some pit or in some other place and
it will come to pass when some of them be overthrown at the
first that whosoever heareth it will say there is a
slaughter among the people that follow Absalom.
and he also that is valiant whose heart is as the heart of a
lion shall utterly melt for all Israel knoweth that thy
father is a Mighty man and they which be with him are valiant
men.
therefore I counsel that all Israel be generally gathered unto
thee from Dan even to Beersheba as the sand that is by the
sea for multitude and that thou go to battle in thine own
person.
so shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be
found and we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the
ground and of him and of all the men that are with him there
shall not be left so Much as one.
moreover if he be gotten into a city then shall all Israel
bring ropes to that city and we will draw it into the river
until there be not one small stone found there.
and Absalom and all the men of Israel said the counsel of
Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel.
for the lord had appointed to defeat the good counsel of
Ahithophel to the intent that the lord might bring evil upon
Absalom.
then said Hushai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the priests thus
and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of
Israel and thus and thus have I counselled.
now therefore send quickly and tell David saying lodge not
this night in the plains of the wilderness but speedily pass
over lest the king be swallowed up and all the people that
are with him.
now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by Enrogel for they might not
be seen to come into the city and a wench went and told them
and they went and told king David.
nevertheless a lad saw them and told Absalom but they went
both of them away quickly and came to a man s house in
Bahurim which had a well in his court whither they went
down.
and the woman took and spread a covering over the well s
mouth and spread ground corn thereon and the thing was not
known.
and when Absalom s servants came to the woman to the house
they said where is Ahimaaz and Jonathan? and the woman said
unto them they be gone over the brook of water. and when they
had sought and could not find them they returned to
Jerusalem.
and it came to pass after they were departed that they came
up out of the well and went and told king David and said
unto David Arise and pass quickly over the water for thus
hath Ahithophel counselled against you.
then David arose and all the people that were with him and
they passed over Jordan by the morning light there lacked not
one of them that was not gone over Jordan.
and when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed he
saddled his ass and arose and gat him home to his house to
his city and put his household in order and hanged himself
and died and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.
then David came to Mahanaim. and Absalom passed over Jordan
he and all the men of Israel with him.
and Absalom made Amasa captain of the host instead of Joab
which Amasa was a man s son whose name was Ithra an
Israelite that went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash
sister to Zeruiah Joab s mother.
so Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead.
and it came to pass when David was come to Mahanaim that
Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of Ammon
and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lodebar and Barzillai the
Gileadite of Rogelim
brought beds and basons and earthen vessels and wheat and
barley and flour and parched corn and beans and lentiles
and parched pulse
and honey and butter and sheep and cheese of kine for
David and for the people that were with him to eat for they
said the people is hungry and weary and thirsty in the
wilderness.
and David numbered the people that were with him and set
captains of thousands and captains of hundreds over them.
and David sent forth a third part of the people under the hand
of Joab and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of
Zeruiah Joab s brother and a third part under the hand of
Ittai the Gittite. and the king said unto the people I will
surely go forth with you myself also.
but the people answered thou shalt not go forth for if we
flee away they will not care for us Neither if half of us
die will they care for us but now thou art worth Ten
thousand of us therefore now it is better that thou succour
us out of the city.
and the king said unto them what seemeth you best I will do.
and the king stood by the gate side and all the people came
out by hundreds and by thousands.
and the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai saying
deal gently for my sake with the young man even with Absalom.
and all the people heard when the king gave all the captains
charge concerning Absalom.
so the people went out into the field against Israel and the
battle was in the wood of Ephraim
where the people of Israel were slain before the servants of
David and there was there a great slaughter that day of
twenty thousand men.
for the battle was there scattered over the face of all the
country and the wood devoured more people that day than the
sword devoured.
and Absalom met the servants of David. and Absalom rode upon a
mule and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak
and his head caught hold of the oak and he was taken up
between the heaven and the earth and the mule that was under
him went away.
and a certain man saw it and told Joab and said behold I
saw Absalom hanged in an oak.
and Joab said unto the man that told him and behold thou
sawest him and why didst thou not smite him there to the
ground? and I would have given thee Ten shekels of Silver and
a girdle.
and the man said unto Joab though I should receive a thousand
shekels of Silver in mine hand yet would I not put forth mine
hand against the king s son for in our hearing the king
charged thee and Abishai and Ittai saying beware that none
touch the young man Absalom.
otherwise I should have wrought falsehood against mine own
life for there is no matter hid from the king and thou
thyself wouldest have set thyself against me.
then said Joab I may not tarry thus with thee. and he took
three darts in his hand and thrust them through the heart of
Absalom while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.
and Ten young men that bare Joab s armour compassed about and
smote Absalom and slew him.
and Joab blew the trumpet and the people returned from
pursuing after Israel for Joab held back the people.
and they took Absalom and cast him into a great pit in the
wood and laid a very great heap of stones upon him and all
Israel fled every one to his tent.
now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for
himself a pillar which is in the king s dale for he said I
have no son to keep my name in remembrance and he called the
pillar after his own name and it is called unto this day
Absalom s place.
then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok let me now run and bear
the king tidings how that the lord hath avenged him of his
enemies.
and Joab said unto him thou shalt not bear tidings this day
but thou shalt bear tidings another day but this day thou
shalt bear no tidings because the king s son is dead.
then said Joab to Cushi go tell the king what thou hast seen.
and Cushi bowed himself unto Joab and ran.
then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab but
howsoever let me I pray thee also run after Cushi. and Joab
said wherefore wilt thou run my son seeing that thou hast
no tidings ready?
but howsoever said he let me run. and he said unto him run.
then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain and overran Cushi.
and David sat between the two gates and the watchman went up
to the roof over the gate unto the wall and lifted up his
eyes and looked and behold a man running alone.
and the watchman cried and told the king. and the king said
if he be alone there is tidings in his mouth. and he came
apace and drew near.
and the watchman saw another man running and the watchman
called unto the porter and said behold another man running
alone. and the king said he also bringeth tidings.
and the watchman said me thinketh the running of the foremost
is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. and the king
said he is a good man and cometh with good tidings.
and Ahimaaz called and said unto the king all is well. and
he fell down to the earth upon his face before the king and
said blessed be the lord thy God which hath delivered up the
men that lifted up their hand against my lord the king.
and the king said is the young man Absalom safe? and Ahimaaz
answered when Joab sent the king s servant and me thy
servant I saw a great tumult but I knew not what it was.
and the king said unto him turn aside and stand here. and he
turned aside and stood still.
and behold Cushi came and Cushi said tidings my lord the
king for the lord hath avenged thee this day of all them that
rose up against thee.
and the king said unto Cushi is the young man Absalom safe?
and Cushi answered the enemies of my lord the king and all
that rise against thee to do thee hurt be as that young man
is.
and the king was Much moved and went up to the chamber over
the gate and wept and as he went thus he said O my son
Absalom my son my son Absalom would God I had died for
thee O Absalom my son my son
and it was told Joab behold the king weepeth and mourneth
for Absalom.
and the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the
people for the people heard say that day how the king was
grieved for his son.
and the people gat them by stealth that day into the city as
people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.
but the king covered his face and the king cried with a loud
voice O my son Absalom O Absalom my son my son
and Joab came into the house to the king and said thou hast
Shamed this day the faces of all thy servants which this day
have saved thy life and the lives of thy sons and of thy
daughters and the lives of thy wives and the lives of thy
concubines
in that thou lovest thine enemies and hatest thy friends. for
thou hast declared this day that thou regardest Neither
princes nor servants for this day I perceive that if Absalom
had lived and all we had died this day then it had pleased
thee well.
now therefore Arise go forth and speak comfortably unto thy
servants for I swear by the lord if thou go not forth there
will not tarry one with thee this night and that will be
worse unto thee than all the evil that befell thee from thy
youth until now.
then the king arose and sat in the gate. and they told unto
all the people saying behold the king doth sit in the gate.
and all the people came before the king for Israel had fled
every man to his tent.
and all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of
Israel saying the king saved us out of the hand of our
enemies and he delivered us out of the hand of the
Philistines and now he is fled out of the land for Absalom.
and Absalom whom we anointed over us is dead in battle. now
therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?
and king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests
saying speak unto the elders of Judah saying why are ye the
last to bring the king back to his house? seeing the speech of
all Israel is come to the king even to his house.
ye are my brethren ye are my bones and my flesh wherefore
then are ye the last to bring back the king?
and say ye to Amasa art thou not of my bone and of my flesh?
God do so to me and more also if thou be not captain of the
host before me continually in the room of Joab.
and he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah even as the
heart of one man so that they sent this word unto the king
return thou and all thy servants.
so the king returned and came to Jordan. and Judah came to
Gilgal to go to meet the king to conduct the king over
Jordan.
and Shimei the son of Gera a Benjamite which was of Bahurim
hasted and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David.
and there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him and Ziba
the servant of the house of Saul and his fifteen sons and his
twenty servants with him and they went over Jordan before the
king.
and there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king s
household and to do what he thought good. and Shimei the son
of Gera fell down before the king as he was come over Jordan
and said unto the king let not my lord impute iniquity unto
me Neither do thou remember that which thy servant did
perversely the day that my lord the king went out of
Jerusalem that the king should take it to his heart.
for thy servant doth know that I have sinned therefore
behold I Am come the first this day of all the house of
Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king.
but Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said shall not
Shimei be put to death for this because he cursed the lord s
anointed?
and David said what have I to do with you ye sons of
Zeruiah that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall
there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for do not I
know that I Am this day king over Israel?
therefore the king said unto Shimei thou shalt not die. and
the king sware unto him.
and Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king
and had Neither dressed his feet nor trimmed his beard nor
washed his clothes from the day the king departed until the
day he came again in peace.
and it came to pass when he was come to Jerusalem to meet the
king that the king said unto him wherefore wentest not thou
with me Mephibosheth?
and he answered my lord O king my servant deceived me for
thy servant said I will saddle me an ass that I may ride
thereon and go to the king because thy servant is lame.
and he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king but
my lord the king is as an angel of God do therefore what is
good in thine eyes.
for all of my father s house were but dead men before my lord
the king yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did
eat at thine own table. what right therefore have I yet to cry
any more unto the king?
and the king said unto him why speakest thou any more of thy
matters? I have said thou and Ziba divide the land.
and Mephibosheth said unto the king yea let him take all
forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his
own house.
and Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim and went
over Jordan with the king to conduct him over Jordan.
now Barzillai was a very aged man even fourscore years old
and he had provided the king of sustenance while he lay at
Mahanaim for he was a very great man.
and the king said unto Barzillai come thou over with me and
I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem.
and Barzillai said unto the king how long have I to live
that I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem?
I Am this day fourscore years old and can I discern between
good and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or what I
drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and
singing women? wherefore then should thy servant be yet a
burden unto my lord the king?
thy servant will go a little way over Jordan with the king
and why should the king recompense it me with such a reward?
let thy servant I pray thee turn back again that I may die
in mine own city and be buried by the grave of my father and
of my mother. but behold thy servant Chimham let him go over
with my lord the king and do to him what shall seem good unto
thee.
and the king answered Chimham shall go over with me and I
will do to him that which shall seem good unto thee and
whatsoever thou shalt require of me that will I do for thee.
and all the people went over Jordan. and when the king was
come over the king kissed Barzillai and blessed him and he
returned unto his own place.
then the king went on to Gilgal and Chimham went on with him
and all the people of Judah conducted the king and also half
the people of Israel.
and behold all the men of Israel came to the king and said
unto the king why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen
thee away and have brought the king and his household and
all David s men with him over Jordan?
and all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel because
the king is near of kin to us wherefore then be ye angry for
this matter? have we eaten at all of the king s cost? or hath
he given us any gift?
and the men of Israel answered the men of Judah and said we
have Ten parts in the king and we have also more right in
David than ye why then did ye despise us that our advice
should not be first had in bringing back our king? and the
words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the
men of Israel.
and there happened to be there a man of Belial whose name was
Sheba the son of Bichri a Benjamite and he blew a trumpet
and said we have no part in David Neither have we
inheritance in the son of Jesse every man to his tents O
Israel.
so every man of Israel went up from after David and followed
Sheba the son of Bichri but the men of Judah clave unto their
king from Jordan even to Jerusalem.
and David came to his house at Jerusalem and the king took
the Ten women his concubines whom he had left to keep the
house and put them in ward and fed them but went not in
unto them. so they were shut up unto the day of their death
living in widowhood.
then said the king to Amasa assemble me the men of Judah
within three days and be thou here present.
so Amasa went to assemble the men of Judah but he tarried
longer than the set time which he had appointed him.
and David said to Abishai now shall Sheba the son of Bichri
do us more harm than did Absalom take thou thy lord s
servants and pursue after him lest he get him fenced cities
and escape us.
and there went out after him Joab s men and the Cherethites
and the Pelethites and all the Mighty men and they went out
of Jerusalem to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.
when they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon Amasa
went before them. and Joab s garment that he had put on was
girded unto him and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened
upon his loins in the sheath thereof and as he went forth it
fell out.
and Joab said to Amasa art thou in health my brother? and
Joab took Amasa by the beard with the right hand to Kiss him.
but Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joab s hand
so he smote him therewith in the fifth rib and shed out his
bowels to the ground and struck him not again and he died.
so Joab and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of
Bichri.
and one of Joab s men stood by him and said he that
favoureth Joab and he that is for David let him go after
Joab.
and Amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway. and
when the man saw that all the people stood still he removed
Amasa out of the highway into the field and cast a cloth upon
him when he saw that every one that came by him stood still.
when he was removed out of the highway all the people went on
after Joab to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.
and he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel and to
Bethmaachah and all the Berites and they were gathered
together and went also after him.
and they came and besieged him in Abel of Bethmaachah and
they cast up a bank against the city and it stood in the
trench and all the people that were with Joab battered the
wall to throw it down.
then cried a wise woman out of the city hear hear say I
pray you unto Joab come near hither that I may speak with
thee.
and when he was come near unto her the woman said art thou
Joab? and he answered I Am he. then she said unto him hear
the words of thine handmaid. and he answered I do hear.
then she spake saying they were wont to speak in old time
saying they shall surely ask counsel at Abel and so they
ended the matter.
I Am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel
thou seekest to destroy a city and a mother in Israel why
wilt thou swallow up the inheritance of the lord?
and Joab answered and said far be it far be it from me that
I should swallow up or destroy.
the matter is not so but a man of mount Ephraim Sheba the
son of Bichri by name hath lifted up his hand against the
king even against David deliver him only and I will depart
from the city. and the woman said unto Joab behold his head
shall be thrown to thee over the wall.
then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. and
they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri and cast it
out to Joab. and he blew a trumpet and they retired from the
city every man to his tent. and Joab returned to Jerusalem
unto the king.
now Joab was over all the host of Israel and Benaiah the son
of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites
and Adoram was over the tribute and Jehoshaphat the son of
Ahilud was recorder
and Sheva was scribe and Zadok and Abiathar were the priests
and Ira also the Jairite was a chief ruler about David.
then there was a famine in the days of David three years year
after year and David enquired of the lord. and the lord
answered it is for Saul and for his bloody house because he
slew the Gibeonites.
and the king called the Gibeonites and said unto them now
the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel but of the
remnant of the Amorites and the children of Israel had sworn
unto them and Saul sought to slay them in his zeal to the
children of Israel and Judah.
wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites what shall I do for
you? and wherewith shall I make the atonement that ye may
bless the inheritance of the lord?
and the Gibeonites said unto him we will have no Silver nor
gold of Saul nor of his house Neither for us shalt thou kill
any man in Israel. and he said what ye shall say that will I
do for you.
and they answered the king the man that consumed us and that
devised against us that we should be destroyed from remaining
in any of the coasts of Israel
let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us and we will
hang them up unto the lord in Gibeah of Saul whom the lord
did choose. and the king said I will give them.
but the king spared Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan the son
of Saul because of the lord s oath that was between them
between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.
but the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah
whom she bare unto Saul Armoni and Mephibosheth and the five
sons of Michal the daughter of Saul whom she brought up for
Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite
and he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites and
they hanged them in the hill before the lord and they fell
all seven together and were put to death in the days of
harvest in the first days in the beginning of barley
harvest.
and Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth and spread it
for her upon the rock from the beginning of harvest until
water dropped upon them out of heaven and suffered Neither
the birds of the air to rest on them by day nor the beasts of
the field by night.
and it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah the
concubine of Saul had done.
and David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of
Jonathan his son from the men of Jabeshgilead which had
stolen them from the street of Bethshan where the Philistines
had hanged them when the Philistines had slain Saul in
Gilboa
and he brought up from thence the bones of Saul and the bones
of Jonathan his son and they gathered the bones of them that
were hanged.
and the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son buried they in the
country of Benjamin in Zelah in the sepulchre of Kish his
father and they performed all that the king commanded. and
after that God was intreated for the land.
moreover the Philistines had yet war again with Israel and
David went down and his servants with him and fought against
the Philistines and David waxed faint.
and Ishbibenob which was of the sons of the giant the weight
of whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass in
weight he being girded with a new sword thought to have
slain David.
but Abishai the son of Zeruiah succoured him and smote the
Philistine and killed him. then the men of David sware unto
him saying thou shalt go no more out with us to battle that
thou quench not the light of Israel.
and it came to pass after this that there was again a battle
with the Philistines at Gob then Sibbechai the Hushathite
slew Saph which was of the sons of the giant.
and there was again a battle in Gob with the Philistines
where Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim a Bethlehemite slew the
brother of Goliath the Gittite the staff of whose spear was
like a weaver s beam.
and there was yet a battle in Gath where was a man of great
stature that had on every hand six fingers and on every foot
six toes four and twenty in number and he also was born to
the giant.
and when he defied Israel Jonathan the son of Shimeah the
brother of David slew him.
these four were born to the giant in Gath and fell by the
hand of David and by the hand of his servants.
and David spake unto the lord the words of this song in the
day that the lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his
enemies and out of the hand of Saul
and he said the lord is my rock and my fortress and my
deliverer
the God of my rock in him will I trust he is my shield and
the horn of my salvation my high tower and my refuge my
saviour thou savest me from violence.
I will call on the lord who is worthy to be praised so shall
I be saved from mine enemies.
when the waves of death compassed me the floods of ungodly
men made me afraid
the sorrows of hell compassed me about the snares of death
prevented me
in my distress I called upon the lord and cried to my God
and he did hear my voice out of his temple and my cry did
enter into his ears.
then the earth shook and trembled the foundations of heaven
moved and shook because he was wroth.
there went up a smoke out of his nostrils and fire out of his
mouth devoured coals were kindled by it.
he bowed the heavens also and came down and darkness was
under his feet.
and he rode upon a Cherub and did fly and he was seen upon
the wings of the wind.
and he made darkness pavilions round about him dark waters
and thick clouds of the skies.
through the brightness before him were coals of fire kindled.
the lord thundered from heaven and the most high uttered his
voice.
and he sent out arrows and scattered them lightning and
discomfited them.
and the channels of the sea appeared the foundations of the
world were discovered at the rebuking of the lord at the
blast of the breath of his nostrils.
he sent from above he took me he drew me out of many waters
he delivered me from my strong enemy and from them that hated
me for they were too strong for me.
they prevented me in the day of my calamity but the lord was
my stay.
he brought me forth also into a large place he delivered me
because he delighted in me.
the lord rewarded me according to my righteousness according
to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.
for I have kept the ways of the lord and have not wickedly
departed from my God.
for all his judgments were before me and as for his statutes
I did not depart from them.
I was also upright before him and have kept myself from mine
iniquity.
therefore the lord hath recompensed me according to my
righteousness according to my cleanness in his eye sight.
with the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful and with
the upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright.
with the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure and with the
froward thou wilt shew thyself unsavoury.
and the afflicted people thou wilt save but thine eyes are
upon the haughty that thou mayest bring them down.
for thou art my lamp O lord and the lord will lighten my
darkness.
for by thee I have run through a troop by my God have I
leaped over a wall.
as for God his way is perfect the word of the lord is tried
he is a buckler to all them that trust in him.
for who is God save the lord? and who is a rock save our
God?
God is my strength and power and he maketh my way perfect.
he maketh my feet like hinds feet and setteth me upon my
high places.
he teacheth my hands to war so that a bow of steel is broken
by mine arms.
thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation and thy
gentleness hath made me great.
thou hast enlarged my steps under me so that my feet did not
slip.
I have pursued mine enemies and destroyed them and turned
not again until I had consumed them.
and I have consumed them and wounded them that they could
not Arise yea they are fallen under my feet.
for thou hast girded me with strength to battle them that
rose up against me hast thou subdued under me.
thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies that I
might destroy them that hate me.
they looked but there was none to save even unto the lord
but he answered them not.
then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth I did
stamp them as the mire of the street and did spread them
abroad.
thou also hast delivered me from the strivings of my people
thou hast kept me to be head of the heathen a people which I
knew not shall serve me.
strangers shall submit themselves unto me as soon as they
hear they shall be obedient unto me.
strangers shall fade away and they shall be afraid out of
their close places.
the lord liveth and blessed be my rock and exalted be the
God of the rock of my salvation.
it is God that avengeth me and that bringeth down the people
under me.
and that bringeth me forth from mine enemies thou also hast
lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me thou
hast delivered me from the violent man.
therefore I will give thanks unto thee O lord among the
heathen and I will sing praises unto thy name.
he is the tower of salvation for his king and sheweth mercy
to his anointed unto David and to his seed for evermore.
now these be the last words of David. David the son of Jesse
said and the man who was raised up on high the anointed of
the God of Jacob and the sweet psalmist of Israel said
the spirit of the lord spake by me and his word was in my
tongue.
the God of Israel said the rock of Israel spake to me he
that ruleth over men must be just ruling in the fear of God.
and he shall be as the light of the morning when the sun
riseth even a morning without clouds as the tender grass
springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain.
although my house be not so with God yet he hath made with me
an everlasting covenant ordered in all things and sure for
this is all my salvation and all my desire although he make
it not to grow.
but the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust
away because they cannot be taken with hands
but the man that shall touch them must be fenced with Iron and
the staff of a spear and they shall be utterly burned with
fire in the same place.
these be the names of the Mighty men whom David had the
Tachmonite that sat in the seat chief among the captains the
same was Adino the Eznite he lift up his spear against eight
hundred whom he slew at one time.
and after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite one of
the three Mighty men with David when they defied the
Philistines that were there gathered together to battle and
the men of Israel were gone away
he arose and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary
and his hand clave unto the sword and the lord wrought a
great victory that day and the people returned after him only
to spoil.
and after him was Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. and
the Philistines were gathered together into a troop where was
a piece of ground full of lentiles and the people fled from
the Philistines.
but he stood in the midst of the ground and defended it and
slew the Philistines and the lord wrought a great victory.
and three of the thirty chief went down and came to David in
the harvest time unto the cave of Adullam and the troop of
the Philistines pitched in the valley of Rephaim.
and David was then in an hold and the garrison of the
Philistines was then in Bethlehem.
and David longed and said oh that one would give me drink of
the water of the well of Bethlehem which is by the gate
and the three Mighty men brake through the host of the
Philistines and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem that
was by the gate and took it and brought it to David
nevertheless he would not drink thereof but poured it out
unto the lord.
and he said be it far from me O lord that I should do this
is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of
their lives? therefore he would not drink it. these things did
these three Mighty men.
and Abishai the brother of Joab the son of Zeruiah was
chief among three. and he lifted up his spear against three
hundred and slew them and had the name among three.
was he not most honourable of three? therefore he was their
captain howbeit he attained not unto the first three.
and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada the son of a valiant man of
Kabzeel who had done many acts he slew two lionlike men of
Moab he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit
in time of snow
and he slew an Egyptian a goodly man and the Egyptian had a
spear in his hand but he went down to him with a staff and
plucked the spear out of the Egyptian s hand and slew him
with his own spear.
these things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada and had the name
among three Mighty men.
he was more honourable than the thirty but he attained not to
the first three. and David set him over his guard.
Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty Elhanan the
son of Dodo of Bethlehem
Shammah the Harodite Elika the Harodite
Helez the Paltite Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite
Abiezer the Anethothite Mebunnai the Hushathite
Zalmon the Ahohite Maharai the Netophathite
Heleb the son of Baanah a Netophathite Ittai the son of
Ribai out of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin
Benaiah the Pirathonite Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash
Abialbon the Arbathite Azmaveth the Barhumite
Eliahba the Shaalbonite of the sons of Jashen Jonathan
Shammah the Hararite Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite
Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai the son of the Maachathite
Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite
Hezrai the Carmelite Paarai the Arbite
Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah Bani the Gadite
Zelek the Ammonite Nahari the Beerothite armourbearer to
Joab the son of Zeruiah
Ira an Ithrite Gareb an Ithrite
Uriah the Hittite thirty and seven in all.
and again the anger of the lord was kindled against Israel
and he moved David against them to say go number Israel and
Judah.
for the king said to Joab the captain of the host which was
with him go now through all the tribes of Israel from Dan
even to Beersheba and number ye the people that I may know
the number of the people.
and Joab said unto the king now the lord thy God add unto the
people how many soever they be an hundredfold and that the
eyes of my lord the king may see it but why doth my lord the
king delight in this thing?
notwithstanding the king s word prevailed against Joab and
against the captains of the host. and Joab and the captains of
the host went out from the presence of the king to number the
people of Israel.
and they passed over Jordan and pitched in Aroer on the
right side of the city that lieth in the midst of the river of
Gad and toward Jazer
then they came to Gilead and to the land of Tahtimhodshi and
they came to Danjaan and about to Zidon
and came to the strong hold of Tyre and to all the cities of
the Hivites and of the Canaanites and they went out to the
south of Judah even to Beersheba.
so when they had gone through all the land they came to
Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.
and Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the
king and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant
men that drew the sword and the men of Judah were five
hundred thousand men.
and David s heart smote him after that he had numbered the
people. and David said unto the lord I have sinned greatly in
that I have done and now I beseech thee O lord take away
the iniquity of thy servant for I have done very foolishly.
for when David was up in the morning the word of the lord
came unto the prophet Gad David s seer saying
go and say unto David thus saith the lord I offer thee three
things choose thee one of them that I may do it unto thee.
so Gad came to David and told him and said unto him shall
seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or wilt thou
flee three months before thine enemies while they pursue
thee? or that there be three days pestilence in thy land? now
advise and see what answer I shall return to him that sent
me.
and David said unto Gad I Am in a great strait let us fall
now into the hand of the lord for his mercies are great and
let me not fall into the hand of man.
so the lord sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning
even to the time appointed and there died of the people from
Dan even to Beersheba seventy thousand men.
and when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to
destroy it the lord repented him of the evil and said to the
angel that destroyed the people it is enough stay now thine
hand. and the angel of the lord was by the threshingplace of
Araunah the Jebusite.
and David spake unto the lord when he saw the angel that smote
the people and said lo I have sinned and I have done
wickedly but these sheep what have they done? let thine
hand I pray thee be against me and against my father s
house.
and Gad came that day to David and said unto him go up rear
an altar unto the lord in the threshingfloor of Araunah the
Jebusite.
and David according to the saying of Gad went up as the lord
commanded.
and Araunah looked and saw the king and his servants coming
on toward him and Araunah went out and bowed himself before
the king on his face upon the ground.
and Araunah said wherefore is my lord the king come to his
servant? and David said to buy the threshingfloor of thee to
build an altar unto the lord that the plague may be stayed
from the people.
and Araunah said unto David let my lord the king take and
offer up what seemeth good unto him behold here be oxen for
burnt sacrifice and threshing instruments and other
instruments of the oxen for wood.
all these things did Araunah as a king give unto the king.
and Araunah said unto the king the lord thy God accept thee.
and the king said unto Araunah nay but I will surely buy it
of thee at a price Neither will I offer burnt offerings unto
the lord my God of that which doth cost me nothing. so David
bought the threshingfloor and the oxen for fifty shekels of
Silver.
and David built there an altar unto the lord and offered
burnt offerings and peace offerings. so the lord was intreated
for the land and the plague was stayed from Israel.
now king David was old and stricken in years and they covered
him with clothes but he gat no heat.
wherefore his servants said unto him let there be sought for
my lord the king a young virgin and let her stand before the
king and let her cherish him and let her lie in thy bosom
that my lord the king may get heat.
so they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the coasts of
Israel and found Abishag a Shunammite and brought her to the
king.
and the damsel was very fair and cherished the king and
ministered to him but the king knew her not.
then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself saying I
will be king and he prepared him chariots and horsemen and
fifty men to run before him.
and his father had not displeased him at any time in saying
why hast thou done so? and he also was a very goodly man and
his mother bare him after Absalom.
and he conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah and with
Abiathar the priest and they following Adonijah helped him.
but Zadok the priest and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada and
Nathan the prophet and Shimei and Rei and the Mighty men
which belonged to David were not with Adonijah.
and Adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone
of Zoheleth which is by Enrogel and called all his brethren
the king s sons and all the men of Judah the king s servants
but Nathan the prophet and Benaiah and the Mighty men and
Solomon his brother he called not.
wherefore Nathan spake unto Bathsheba the mother of Solomon
saying hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith
doth reign and David our lord knoweth it not?
now therefore come let me I pray thee give thee counsel
that thou mayest save thine own life and the life of thy son
Solomon.
go and get thee in unto king David and say unto him didst
not thou my lord O king swear unto thine handmaid saying
assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me and he shall
sit upon my throne? why then doth Adonijah reign?
behold while thou yet talkest there with the king I also
will come in after thee and confirm thy words.
and Bathsheba went in unto the king into the chamber and the
king was very old and Abishag the Shunammite ministered unto
the king.
and Bathsheba bowed and did obeisance unto the king. and the
king said what wouldest thou?
and she said unto him my lord thou swarest by the lord thy
God unto thine handmaid saying assuredly Solomon thy son
shall reign after me and he shall sit upon my throne.
and now behold Adonijah reigneth and now my lord the king
thou knowest it not
and he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abundance
and hath called all the sons of the king and Abiathar the
priest and Joab the captain of the host but Solomon thy
servant hath he not called.
and thou my lord O king the eyes of all Israel are upon
thee that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the
throne of my lord the king after him.
otherwise it shall come to pass when my lord the king shall
sleep with his fathers that I and my son Solomon shall be
counted offenders.
and lo while she yet talked with the king Nathan the
prophet also came in.
and they told the king saying behold Nathan the prophet. and
when he was come in before the king he bowed himself before
the king with his face to the ground.
and Nathan said my lord O king hast thou said Adonijah
shall reign after me and he shall sit upon my throne?
for he is gone down this day and hath slain oxen and fat
cattle and sheep in abundance and hath called all the king s
sons and the captains of the host and Abiathar the priest
and behold they eat and drink before him and say God save
king Adonijah.
but me even me thy servant and Zadok the priest and Benaiah
the son of Jehoiada and thy servant Solomon hath he not
called.
is this thing done by my lord the king and thou hast not
shewed it unto thy servant who should sit on the throne of my
lord the king after him?
then king David answered and said call me Bathsheba. and she
came into the king s presence and stood before the king.
and the king sware and said as the lord liveth that hath
redeemed my soul out of all distress
even as I sware unto thee by the lord God of Israel saying
assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me and he shall
sit upon my throne in my stead even so will I certainly do
this day.
then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth and did
reverence to the king and said let my lord king David live
for ever.
and king David said call me Zadok the priest and Nathan the
prophet and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. and they came before
the king.
the king also said unto them take with you the servants of
your lord and cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own
mule and bring him down to Gihon
and let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him
there king over Israel and blow ye with the trumpet and say
God save king Solomon.
then ye shall come up after him that he may come and sit upon
my throne for he shall be king in my stead and I have
appointed him to be ruler over Israel and over Judah.
and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king and said
Amen the lord God of my lord the king say so too.
as the lord hath been with my lord the king even so be he
with Solomon and make his throne greater than the throne of
my lord king David.
so Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet and Benaiah the
son of Jehoiada and the Cherethites and the Pelethites went
down and caused Solomon to ride upon king David s mule and
brought him to Gihon.
and Zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the
tabernacle and anointed Solomon. and they blew the trumpet
and all the people said God save king Solomon.
and all the people came up after him and the people piped
with pipes and rejoiced with great joy so that the earth
rent with the sound of them.
and Adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as
they had made an end of eating. and when Joab heard the sound
of the trumpet he said wherefore is this noise of the city
being in an uproar?
and while he yet spake behold Jonathan the son of Abiathar
the priest came and Adonijah said unto him come in for thou
art a valiant man and bringest good tidings.
and Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah verily our lord
king David hath made Solomon king.
and the king hath sent with him Zadok the priest and Nathan
the prophet and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada and the
Cherethites and the Pelethites and they have caused him to
ride upon the king s mule
and Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him
king in Gihon and they are come up from thence rejoicing so
that the city rang again. this is the noise that ye have
heard.
and also Solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.
and moreover the king s servants came to bless our lord king
David saying God make the name of Solomon better than thy
name and make his throne greater than thy throne. and the
king bowed himself upon the bed.
and also thus said the king blessed be the lord God of
Israel which hath given one to sit on my throne this day
mine eyes even seeing it.
and all the guests that were with Adonijah were afraid and
rose up and went every man his way.
and Adonijah feared because of Solomon and arose and went
and caught hold on the horns of the altar.
and it was told Solomon saying behold Adonijah feareth king
Solomon for lo he hath caught hold on the horns of the
altar saying let king Solomon swear unto me today that he
will not slay his servant with the sword.
and Solomon said if he will shew himself a worthy man there
shall not an hair of him fall to the earth but if wickedness
shall be found in him he shall die.
so king Solomon sent and they brought him down from the
altar. and he came and bowed himself to king Solomon and
Solomon said unto him go to thine house.
now the days of David drew nigh that he should die and he
charged Solomon his son saying
I go the way of all the earth be thou strong therefore and
shew thyself a man
and keep the charge of the lord thy God to walk in his ways
to keep his statutes and his commandments and his judgments
and his testimonies as it is written in the law of Moses
that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest and
whithersoever thou turnest thyself
that the lord may continue his word which he spake concerning
me saying if thy children take heed to their way to walk
before me in truth with all their heart and with all their
soul there shall not fail thee said he a man on the throne
of Israel.
moreover thou knowest also what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to
me and what he did to the two captains of the hosts of
Israel unto Abner the son of Ner and unto Amasa the son of
Jether whom he slew and shed the blood of war in peace and
put the blood of war upon his girdle that was about his loins
and in his shoes that were on his feet.
do therefore according to thy wisdom and let not his hoar
head go down to the grave in peace.
but shew kindness unto the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite
and let them be of those that eat at thy table for so they
came to me when I fled because of Absalom thy brother.
and behold thou hast with thee Shimei the son of Gera a
Benjamite of Bahurim which cursed me with a grievous curse in
the day when I went to Mahanaim but he came down to meet me
at Jordan and I sware to him by the lord saying I will not
put thee to death with the sword.
now therefore hold him not guiltless for thou art a wise man
and knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him but his hoar
head bring thou down to the grave with blood.
so David slept with his fathers and was buried in the city of
David.
and the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years
seven years reigned he in Hebron and thirty and three years
reigned he in Jerusalem.
then sat Solomon upon the throne of David his father and his
kingdom was established greatly.
and Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother
of Solomon. and she said comest thou peaceably? and he said
peaceably.
he said moreover I have somewhat to say unto thee. and she
said say on.
and he said thou knowest that the kingdom was mine and that
all Israel set their faces on me that I should reign howbeit
the kingdom is turned about and is become my brother s for
it was his from the lord.
and now I ask one petition of thee deny me not. and she said
unto him say on.
and he said speak I pray thee unto Solomon the king for
he will not say thee nay that he give me Abishag the
Shunammite to wife.
and Bathsheba said well I will speak for thee unto the king.
Bathsheba therefore went unto king Solomon to speak unto him
for Adonijah. and the king rose up to meet her and bowed
himself unto her and sat down on his throne and caused a
seat to be set for the king s mother and she sat on his right
hand.
then she said I desire one small petition of thee I pray
thee say me not nay. and the king said unto her ask on my
mother for I will not say thee nay.
and she said let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah
thy brother to wife.
and king Solomon answered and said unto his mother and why
dost thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for him
the kingdom also for he is mine elder brother even for him
and for Abiathar the priest and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.
then king Solomon sware by the lord saying God do so to me
and more also if Adonijah have not spoken this word against
his own life.
now therefore as the lord liveth which hath established me
and set me on the throne of David my father and who hath made
me an house as he promised Adonijah shall be put to death
this day.
and king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada and he fell upon him that he died.
and unto Abiathar the priest said the king get thee to
Anathoth unto thine own fields for thou art worthy of death
but I will not at this time put thee to death because thou
barest the ark of the lord God before David my father and
because thou hast been afflicted in all wherein my father was
afflicted.
so Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the
lord that he might fulfil the word of the lord which he
spake concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.
then tidings came to Joab for Joab had turned after Adonijah
though he turned not after Absalom. and Joab fled unto the
tabernacle of the lord and caught hold on the horns of the
altar.
and it was told king Solomon that Joab was fled unto the
tabernacle of the lord and behold he is by the altar. then
Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada saying go fall
upon him.
and Benaiah came to the tabernacle of the lord and said unto
him thus saith the king come forth. and he said nay but I
will die here. and Benaiah brought the king word again
saying thus said Joab and thus he answered me.
and the king said unto him do as he hath said and fall upon
him and bury him that thou mayest take away the innocent
blood which Joab shed from me and from the house of my
father.
and the lord shall return his blood upon his own head who
fell upon two men more righteous and better than he and slew
them with the sword my father David not knowing thereof to
wit Abner the son of Ner captain of the host of Israel and
Amasa the son of Jether captain of the host of Judah.
their blood shall therefore return upon the head of Joab and
upon the head of his seed for ever but upon David and upon
his seed and upon his house and upon his throne shall there
be peace for ever from the lord.
so Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up and fell upon him and
slew him and he was buried in his own house in the
wilderness.
and the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his room over
the host and Zadok the priest did the king put in the room of
Abiathar.
and the king sent and called for Shimei and said unto him
build thee an house in Jerusalem and dwell there and go not
forth thence any whither.
for it shall be that on the day thou goest out and passest
over the brook Kidron thou shalt know for certain that thou
shalt surely die thy blood shall be upon thine own head.
and Shimei said unto the king the saying is good as my lord
the king hath said so will thy servant do. and Shimei dwelt
in Jerusalem many days.
and it came to pass at the end of three years that two of the
servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish son of Maachah king of
Gath. and they told Shimei saying behold thy servants be in
Gath.
and Shimei arose and saddled his ass and went to Gath to
Achish to seek his servants and Shimei went and brought his
servants from Gath.
and it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to
Gath and was come again.
and the king sent and called for Shimei and said unto him
did I not make thee to swear by the lord and protested unto
thee saying know for a certain on the day thou goest out
and walkest abroad any whither that thou shalt surely die?
and thou saidst unto me the word that I have heard is good.
why then hast thou not kept the oath of the lord and the
commandment that I have charged thee with?
the king said moreover to Shimei thou knowest all the
wickedness which thine heart is privy to that thou didst to
David my father therefore the lord shall return thy
wickedness upon thine own head
and king Solomon shall be blessed and the throne of David
shall be established before the lord for ever.
so the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada which went
out and fell upon him that he died. and the kingdom was
established in the hand of Solomon.
and Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt and took
Pharaoh s daughter and brought her into the city of David
until he had made an end of building his own house and the
house of the lord and the wall of Jerusalem round about.
only the people sacrificed in high places because there was
no house built unto the name of the lord until those days.
and Solomon loved the lord walking in the statutes of David
his father only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high
places.
and the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there for that was
the great high place a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon
offer upon that altar.
in Gibeon the lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night
and God said ask what I shall give thee.
and Solomon said thou hast shewed unto thy servant David my
father great mercy according as he walked before thee in
truth and in righteousness and in uprightness of heart with
thee and thou hast kept for him this great kindness that
thou hast given him a son to sit on his throne as it is this
day.
and now O lord my God thou hast made thy servant king
instead of David my father and I Am but a little child I
know not how to go out or come in.
and thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast
chosen a great people that cannot be numbered nor counted
for multitude.
give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
people that I may discern between good and bad for who is
able to judge this thy so great a people?
and the speech pleased the lord that Solomon had asked this
thing.
and God said unto him because thou hast asked this thing and
hast not asked for thyself long life Neither hast asked
Riches for thyself nor hast asked the life of thine enemies
but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment
behold I have done according to thy words lo I have given
thee a wise and an understanding heart so that there was none
like thee before thee Neither after thee shall any Arise like
unto thee.
and I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked
both Riches and honour so that there shall not be any among
the kings like unto thee all thy days.
and if thou wilt walk in my ways to keep my statutes and my
commandments as thy father David did walk then I will
lengthen thy days.
and Solomon awoke and behold it was a dream. and he came to
Jerusalem and stood before the ark of the covenant of the
lord and offered up burnt offerings and offered peace
offerings and made a feast to all his servants.
then came there two women that were harlots unto the king
and stood before him.
and the one woman said O my lord I and this woman dwell in
one house and I was delivered of a child with her in the
house.
and it came to pass the third day after that I was delivered
that this woman was delivered also and we were together
there was no stranger with us in the house save we two in the
house.
and this woman s child died in the night because she overlaid
it.
and she arose at midnight and took my son from beside me
while thine handmaid slept and laid it in her bosom and laid
her dead child in my bosom.
and when I rose in the morning to give my child suck behold
it was dead but when I had considered it in the morning
behold it was not my son which I did bear.
and the other woman said nay but the living is my son and
the dead is thy son. and this said no but the dead is thy
son and the living is my son. thus they spake before the
king.
then said the king the one saith this is my son that liveth
and thy son is the dead and the other saith nay but thy son
is the dead and my son is the living.
and the king said bring me a sword. and they brought a sword
before the king.
and the king said divide the living child in two and give
half to the one and half to the other.
then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king
for her bowels yearned upon her son and she said O my lord
give her the living child and in no wise slay it. but the
other said let it be Neither mine nor thine but divide it.
then the king answered and said give her the living child
and in no wise slay it she is the mother thereof.
and all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had
judged and they feared the king for they saw that the wisdom
of God was in him to do judgment.
so king Solomon was king over all Israel.
and these were the princes which he had Azariah the son of
Zadok the priest
Elihoreph and Ahiah the sons of Shisha scribes Jehoshaphat
the son of Ahilud the recorder.
and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the host and Zadok
and Abiathar were the priests
and Azariah the son of Nathan was over the officers and Zabud
the son of Nathan was principal officer and the king s
friend
and Ahishar was over the household and Adoniram the son of
Abda was over the tribute.
and Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel which
provided victuals for the king and his household each man his
month in a year made provision.
and these are their names the son of Hur in mount Ephraim
the son of Dekar in Makaz and in Shaalbim and Bethshemesh
and Elonbethhanan
the son of Hesed in Aruboth to him pertained Sochoh and all
the land of Hepher
the son of Abinadab in all the region of Dor which had
Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife
Baana the son of Ahilud to him pertained Taanach and Megiddo
and all Bethshean which is by Zartanah beneath Jezreel from
Bethshean to Abelmeholah even unto the place that is beyond
Jokneam
the son of Geber in Ramothgilead to him pertained the towns
of Jair the son of Manasseh which are in Gilead to him also
pertained the region of Argob which is in Bashan threescore
great cities with walls and brasen bars
Ahinadab the son of Iddo had Mahanaim
Ahimaaz was in Naphtali he also took Basmath the daughter of
Solomon to wife
Baanah the son of Hushai was in Asher and in Aloth
Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah in Issachar
Shimei the son of Elah in Benjamin
Geber the son of Uri was in the country of Gilead in the
country of Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of
Bashan and he was the only officer which was in the land.
Judah and Israel were many as the sand which is by the sea in
multitude eating and drinking and making merry.
and Solomon reigned over all kingdoms from the river unto the
land of the Philistines and unto the border of Egypt they
brought presents and served Solomon all the days of his life.
and Solomon s provision for one day was thirty measures of
fine flour and threescore measures of meal
Ten fat oxen and twenty oxen out of the pastures and an
hundred sheep beside harts and roebucks and fallowdeer and
fatted fowl.
for he had dominion over all the region on this side the
river from Tiphsah even to Azzah over all the kings on this
side the river and he had peace on all sides round about him.
and Judah and Israel dwelt safely every man under his vine
and under his fig tree from Dan even to Beersheba all the
days of Solomon.
and Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his
chariots and twelve thousand horsemen.
and those officers provided victual for king Solomon and for
all that came unto king Solomon s table every man in his
month they lacked nothing.
barley also and straw for the horses and dromedaries brought
they unto the place where the officers were every man
according to his charge.
and God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding Much
and largeness of heart even as the sand that is on the sea
shore.
and Solomon s wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children
of the east country and all the wisdom of Egypt.
for he was wiser than all men than Ethan the Ezrahite and
Heman and Chalcol and Darda the sons of Mahol and his fame
was in all nations round about.
and he spake three thousand proverbs and his songs were a
thousand and five.
and he spake of trees from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon
even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall he spake
also of beasts and of fowl and of creeping things and of
fishes.
and there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon
from all kings of the earth which had heard of his wisdom.
and Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon for he
had heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his
father for Hiram was ever a lover of David.
and Solomon sent to Hiram saying
thou knowest how that David my father could not build an house
unto the name of the lord his God for the wars which were
about him on every side until the lord put them under the
soles of his feet.
but now the lord my God hath given me rest on every side so
that there is Neither adversary nor evil occurrent.
and behold I purpose to build an house unto the name of the
lord my God as the lord spake unto David my father saying
thy son whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room he shall
build an house unto my name.
now therefore command thou that they Hew me cedar trees out of
Lebanon and my servants shall be with thy servants and unto
thee will I give hire for thy servants according to all that
thou shalt appoint for thou knowest that there is not among
us any that can skill to Hew timber like unto the Sidonians.
and it came to pass when Hiram heard the words of Solomon
that he rejoiced greatly and said blessed be the lord this
day which hath given unto David a wise son over this great
people.
and Hiram sent to Solomon saying I have considered the
things which thou sentest to me for and I will do all thy
desire concerning timber of cedar and concerning timber of
fir.
my servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea
and I will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that
thou shalt appoint me and will cause them to be discharged
there and thou shalt receive them and thou shalt accomplish
my desire in giving food for my household.
so Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees and fir trees according to
all his desire.
and Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for
food to his household and twenty measures of pure oil thus
gave Solomon to Hiram year by year.
and the lord gave Solomon wisdom as he promised him and
there was peace between Hiram and Solomon and they two made a
league together.
and king Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel and the levy
was thirty thousand men.
and he sent them to Lebanon Ten thousand a month by courses
a month they were in Lebanon and two months at home and
Adoniram was over the levy.
and Solomon had threescore and Ten thousand that bare burdens
and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains
beside the chief of Solomon s officers which were over the
work three thousand and three hundred which ruled over the
people that wrought in the work.
and the king commanded and they brought great stones costly
stones and hewed stones to lay the foundation of the house.
and Solomon s builders and Hiram s builders did Hew them and
the stonesquarers so they prepared timber and stones to build
the house.
and it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year
after the children of Israel were come out of the land of
Egypt in the fourth year of Solomon s reign over Israel in
the month Zif which is the second month that he began to
build the house of the lord.
and the house which king Solomon built for the lord the
length thereof was threescore cubits and the breadth thereof
twenty cubits and the height thereof thirty cubits.
and the porch before the temple of the house twenty cubits
was the length thereof according to the breadth of the house
and Ten cubits was the breadth thereof before the house.
and for the house he made windows of narrow lights.
and against the wall of the house he built chambers round
about against the walls of the house round about both of the
temple and of the oracle and he made chambers round about
the nethermost chamber was five cubits broad and the middle
was six cubits broad and the third was seven cubits broad
for without in the wall of the house he made narrowed rests
round about that the beams should not be fastened in the
walls of the house.
and the house when it was in building was built of stone
made ready before it was brought thither so that there was
Neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of Iron heard in the
house while it was in building.
the door for the middle chamber was in the right side of the
house and they went up with winding stairs into the middle
chamber and out of the middle into the third.
so he built the house and finished it and covered the house
with beams and boards of cedar.
and then he built chambers against all the house five cubits
high and they rested on the house with timber of cedar.
and the word of the lord came to Solomon saying
concerning this house which thou art in building if thou wilt
walk in my statutes and execute my judgments and keep all my
commandments to walk in them then will I perform my word with
thee which I spake unto David thy father
and I will dwell among the children of Israel and will not
forsake my people Israel.
so Solomon built the house and finished it.
and he built the walls of the house within with boards of
cedar both the floor of the house and the walls of the
ceiling and he covered them on the inside with wood and
covered the floor of the house with planks of fir.
and he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house both the
floor and the walls with boards of cedar he even built them
for it within even for the oracle even for the most holy
place.
and the house that is the temple before it was forty cubits
long.
and the cedar of the house within was carved with knops and
open flowers all was cedar there was no stone seen.
and the oracle he prepared in the house within to set there
the ark of the covenant of the lord.
and the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length
and twenty cubits in breadth and twenty cubits in the height
thereof and he overlaid it with pure gold and so covered the
altar which was of cedar.
so Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold and he
made a partition by the chains of gold before the oracle and
he overlaid it with gold.
and the whole house he overlaid with gold until he had
finished all the house also the whole altar that was by the
oracle he overlaid with gold.
and within the oracle he made two Cherubims of olive tree
each Ten cubits high.
and five cubits was the one wing of the Cherub and five
cubits the other wing of the Cherub from the uttermost part
of the one wing unto the uttermost part of the other were Ten
cubits.
and the other Cherub was Ten cubits both the Cherubims were
of one measure and one size.
the height of the one Cherub was Ten cubits and so was it of
the other Cherub.
and he set the Cherubims within the inner house and they
stretched forth the wings of the Cherubims so that the wing
of the one touched the one wall and the wing of the other
Cherub touched the other wall and their wings touched one
another in the midst of the house.
and he overlaid the Cherubims with gold.
and he carved all the walls of the house round about with
carved figures of Cherubims and palm trees and open flowers
within and without.
and the floors of the house he overlaid with gold within and
without.
and for the entering of the oracle he made doors of olive
tree the lintel and side posts were a fifth part of the wall.
the two doors also were of olive tree and he carved upon them
carvings of Cherubims and palm trees and open flowers and
overlaid them with gold and spread gold upon the Cherubims
and upon the palm trees.
so also made he for the door of the temple posts of olive
tree a fourth part of the wall.
and the two doors were of fir tree the two leaves of the one
door were folding and the two leaves of the other door were
folding.
and he carved thereon Cherubims and palm trees and open
flowers and covered them with gold fitted upon the carved
work.
and he built the inner court with three rows of hewed stone
and a row of cedar beams.
in the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the lord
laid in the month Zif
and in the eleventh year in the month Bul which is the
eighth month was the house finished throughout all the parts
thereof and according to all the fashion of it. so was he
seven years in building it.
but Solomon was building his own house thirteen years and he
finished all his house.
he built also the house of the forest of Lebanon the length
thereof was an hundred cubits and the breadth thereof fifty
cubits and the height thereof thirty cubits upon four rows
of cedar pillars with cedar beams upon the pillars.
and it was covered with cedar above upon the beams that lay
on forty five pillars fifteen in a row.
and there were windows in three rows and light was against
light in three ranks.
and all the doors and posts were square with the windows and
light was against light in three ranks.
and he made a porch of pillars the length thereof was fifty
cubits and the breadth thereof thirty cubits and the porch
was before them and the other pillars and the thick beam were
before them.
then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge even
the porch of judgment and it was covered with cedar from one
side of the floor to the other.
and his house where he dwelt had another court within the
porch which was of the like work. Solomon made also an house
for Pharaoh s daughter whom he had taken to wife like unto
this porch.
all these were of costly stones according to the measures of
hewed stones sawed with saws within and without even from
the foundation unto the coping and so on the outside toward
the great court.
and the foundation was of costly stones even great stones
stones of Ten cubits and stones of eight cubits.
and above were costly stones after the measures of hewed
stones and cedars.
and the great court round about was with three rows of hewed
stones and a row of cedar beams both for the inner court of
the house of the lord and for the porch of the house.
and king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.
he was a widow s son of the tribe of Naphtali and his father
was a man of Tyre a worker in brass and he was filled with
wisdom and understanding and cunning to work all works in
brass. and he came to king Solomon and wrought all his work.
for he cast two pillars of brass of eighteen cubits high
apiece and a line of twelve cubits did compass either of them
about.
and he made two chapiters of molten brass to set upon the
tops of the pillars the height of the one chapiter was five
cubits and the height of the other chapiter was five cubits
and nets of checker work and wreaths of chain work for the
chapiters which were upon the top of the pillars seven for
the one chapiter and seven for the other chapiter.
and he made the pillars and two rows round about upon the one
network to cover the chapiters that were upon the top with
pomegranates and so did he for the other chapiter.
and the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars were
of lily work in the porch four cubits.
and the chapiters upon the two pillars had pomegranates also
above over against the belly which was by the network and
the pomegranates were two hundred in rows round about upon the
other chapiter.
and he set up the pillars in the porch of the temple and he
set up the right pillar and called the name thereof Jachin
and he set up the left pillar and called the name thereof
Boaz.
and upon the top of the pillars was lily work so was the work
of the pillars finished.
and he made a molten sea Ten cubits from the one brim to the
other it was round all about and his height was five cubits
and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.
and under the brim of it round about there were knops
compassing it Ten in a cubit compassing the sea round about
the knops were cast in two rows when it was cast.
it stood upon twelve oxen three looking toward the north and
three looking toward the west and three looking toward the
south and three looking toward the east and the sea was set
above upon them and all their hinder parts were inward.
and it was an hand breadth thick and the brim thereof was
wrought like the brim of a cup with flowers of lilies it
contained two thousand baths.
and he made Ten bases of brass four cubits was the length of
one base and four cubits the breadth thereof and three
cubits the height of it.
and the work of the bases was on this manner they had
borders and the borders were between the ledges
and on the borders that were between the ledges were lions
oxen and Cherubims and upon the ledges there was a base
above and beneath the lions and oxen were certain additions
made of thin work.
and every base had four brasen wheels and plates of brass
and the four corners thereof had undersetters under the laver
were undersetters molten at the side of every addition.
and the mouth of it within the chapiter and above was a cubit
but the mouth thereof was round after the work of the base a
cubit and an half and also upon the mouth of it were gravings
with their borders foursquare not round.
and under the borders were four wheels and the axletrees of
the wheels were joined to the base and the height of a wheel
was a cubit and half a cubit.
and the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot
wheel their axletrees and their naves and their felloes
and their spokes were all molten.
and there were four undersetters to the four corners of one
base and the undersetters were of the very base itself.
and in the top of the base was there a round compass of half a
cubit high and on the top of the base the ledges thereof and
the borders thereof were of the same.
for on the plates of the ledges thereof and on the borders
thereof he graved Cherubims lions and palm trees according
to the proportion of every one and additions round about.
after this manner he made the Ten bases all of them had one
casting one measure and one size.
then made he Ten lavers of brass one laver contained forty
baths and every laver was four cubits and upon every one of
the Ten bases one laver.
and he put five bases on the right side of the house and five
on the left side of the house and he set the sea on the right
side of the house eastward over against the south.
and Hiram made the lavers and the shovels and the basons. so
Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he made king
Solomon for the house of the lord
the two pillars and the two bowls of the chapiters that were
on the top of the two pillars and the two networks to cover
the two bowls of the chapiters which were upon the top of the
pillars
and four hundred pomegranates for the two networks even two
rows of pomegranates for one network to cover the two bowls
of the chapiters that were upon the pillars
and the Ten bases and Ten lavers on the bases
and one sea and twelve oxen under the sea
and the pots and the shovels and the basons and all these
vessels which Hiram made to king Solomon for the house of the
lord were of bright brass.
in the plain of Jordan did the king cast them in the clay
ground between Succoth and Zarthan.
and Solomon left all the vessels unweighed because they were
exceeding many Neither was the weight of the brass found out.
and Solomon made all the vessels that pertained unto the house
of the lord the altar of gold and the table of gold
whereupon the shewbread was
and the candlesticks of pure gold five on the right side and
five on the left before the oracle with the flowers and the
lamps and the tongs of gold
and the bowls and the snuffers and the basons and the
spoons and the censers of pure gold and the hinges of gold
both for the doors of the inner house the most holy place
and for the doors of the house to wit of the temple.
so was ended all the work that king Solomon made for the house
of the lord. and Solomon brought in the things which David his
father had dedicated even the Silver and the gold and the
vessels did he put among the treasures of the house of the
lord.
then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the heads
of the tribes the chief of the fathers of the children of
Israel unto king Solomon in Jerusalem that they might bring
up the ark of the covenant of the lord out of the city of
David which is Zion.
and all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto king
Solomon at the feast in the month Ethanim which is the
seventh month.
and all the elders of Israel came and the priests took up the
ark.
and they brought up the ark of the lord and the tabernacle of
the congregation and all the holy vessels that were in the
tabernacle even those did the priests and the Levites bring
up.
and king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel that
were assembled unto him were with him before the ark
sacrificing sheep and oxen that could not be told nor
numbered for multitude.
and the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the lord
unto his place into the oracle of the house to the most holy
place even under the wings of the Cherubims.
for the Cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place
of the ark and the Cherubims covered the ark and the staves
thereof above.
and they drew out the staves that the ends of the staves were
seen out in the holy place before the oracle and they were
not seen without and there they are unto this day.
there was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone
which Moses put there at Horeb when the lord made a covenant
with the children of Israel when they came out of the land of
Egypt.
and it came to pass when the priests were come out of the
holy place that the cloud filled the house of the lord
so that the priests could not stand to minister because of the
cloud for the glory of the lord had filled the house of the
lord.
then spake Solomon the lord said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.
I have surely built thee an house to dwell in a settled place
for thee to abide in for ever.
and the king turned his face about and blessed all the
congregation of Israel and all the congregation of Israel
stood
and he said blessed be the lord God of Israel which spake
with his mouth unto David my father and hath with his hand
fulfilled it saying
since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out of
Egypt I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to
build an house that my name might be therein but I chose
David to be over my people Israel.
and it was in the heart of David my father to build an house
for the name of the lord God of Israel.
and the lord said unto David my father whereas it was in
thine heart to build an house unto my name thou didst well
that it was in thine heart.
nevertheless thou shalt not build the house but thy son that
shall come forth out of thy loins he shall build the house
unto my name.
and the lord hath performed his word that he spake and I Am
risen up in the room of David my father and sit on the throne
of Israel as the lord promised and have built an house for
the name of the lord God of Israel.
and I have set there a place for the ark wherein is the
covenant of the lord which he made with our fathers when he
brought them out of the land of Egypt.
and Solomon stood before the altar of the lord in the presence
of all the congregation of Israel and spread forth his hands
toward heaven
and he said lord God of Israel there is no God like thee in
heaven above or on earth beneath who keepest covenant and
mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their
heart
who hast kept with thy servant David my father that thou
promisedst him thou spakest also with thy mouth and hast
fulfilled it with thine hand as it is this day.
therefore now lord God of Israel keep with thy servant David
my father that thou promisedst him saying there shall not
fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel so
that thy children take heed to their way that they walk
before me as thou hast walked before me.
and now O God of Israel let thy word I pray thee be
verified which thou spakest unto thy servant David my father.
but will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain thee how Much less this
house that I have builded?
yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant and to
his supplication O lord my God to hearken unto the cry and
to the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee to day
that thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day
even toward the place of which thou hast said my name shall
be there that thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thy
servant shall make toward this place.
and hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant and of
thy people Israel when they shall pray toward this place and
hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place and when thou hearest
forgive.
if any man trespass against his neighbour and an oath be laid
upon him to cause him to swear and the oath come before thine
altar in this house
then hear thou in heaven and do and judge thy servants
condemning the wicked to bring his way upon his head and
justifying the righteous to give him according to his
righteousness.
when thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy
because they have sinned against thee and shall turn again to
thee and confess thy name and pray and make supplication
unto thee in this house
then hear thou in heaven and forgive the Sin of thy people
Israel and bring them again unto the land which thou Gavest
unto their fathers.
when heaven is shut up and there is no rain because they
have sinned against thee if they pray toward this place and
confess thy name and turn from their Sin when thou
afflictest them
then hear thou in heaven and forgive the Sin of thy servants
and of thy people Israel that thou teach them the good way
wherein they should walk and give rain upon thy land which
thou hast given to thy people for an inheritance.
if there be in the land famine if there be pestilence
blasting mildew locust or if there be caterpiller if their
enemy besiege them in the land of their cities whatsoever
plague whatsoever sickness there be
what prayer and supplication soever be made by any man or by
all thy people Israel which shall know every man the plague
of his own heart and spread forth his hands toward this
house
then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place and forgive and
do and give to every man according to his ways whose heart
thou knowest for thou even thou only knowest the hearts of
all the children of men
that they may fear thee all the days that they live in the
land which thou Gavest unto our fathers.
moreover concerning a stranger that is not of thy people
Israel but cometh out of a far country for thy name s sake
 for they shall hear of thy great name and of thy strong
hand and of thy stretched out arm when he shall come and
pray toward this house
hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place and do according to
all that the stranger calleth to thee for that all people of
the earth may know thy name to fear thee as do thy people
Israel and that they may know that this house which I have
builded is called by thy name.
if thy people go out to battle against their enemy
whithersoever thou shalt send them and shall pray unto the
lord toward the city which thou hast chosen and toward the
house that I have built for thy name
then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication
and maintain their cause.
if they Sin against thee for there is no man that sinneth
not and thou be angry with them and deliver them to the
enemy so that they carry them away captives unto the land of
the enemy far or near
yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land whither they
were carried captives and repent and make supplication unto
thee in the land of them that carried them captives saying
we have sinned and have done perversely we have committed
wickedness
and so return unto thee with all their heart and with all
their soul in the land of their enemies which led them away
captive and pray unto thee toward their land which thou
Gavest unto their fathers the city which thou hast chosen
and the house which I have built for thy name
then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven
thy dwelling place and maintain their cause
and forgive thy people that have sinned against thee and all
their transgressions wherein they have transgressed against
thee and give them compassion before them who carried them
captive that they may have compassion on them
for they be thy people and thine inheritance which thou
broughtest forth out of Egypt from the midst of the furnace
of Iron
that thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy
servant and unto the supplication of thy people Israel to
hearken unto them in all that they call for unto thee.
for thou didst separate them from among all the people of the
earth to be thine inheritance as thou spakest by the hand of
Moses thy servant when thou broughtest our fathers out of
Egypt O lord God.
and it was so that when Solomon had made an end of praying
all this prayer and supplication unto the lord he arose from
before the altar of the lord from kneeling on his knees with
his hands spread up to heaven.
and he stood and blessed all the congregation of Israel with
a loud voice saying
blessed be the lord that hath given rest unto his people
Israel according to all that he promised there hath not
failed one word of all his good promise which he promised by
the hand of Moses his servant.
the lord our God be with us as he was with our fathers let
him not leave us nor forsake us
that he may incline our hearts unto him to walk in all his
ways and to keep his commandments and his statutes and his
judgments which he commanded our fathers.
and let these my words wherewith I have made supplication
before the lord be nigh unto the lord our God day and night
that he maintain the cause of his servant and the cause of
his people Israel at all times as the matter shall require
that all the people of the earth may know that the lord is
God and that there is none else.
let your heart therefore be perfect with the lord our God to
walk in his statutes and to keep his commandments as at this
day.
and the king and all Israel with him offered sacrifice
before the lord.
and Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerings which he
offered unto the lord two and twenty thousand oxen and an
hundred and twenty thousand sheep. so the king and all the
children of Israel dedicated the house of the lord.
the same day did the king hallow the middle of the court that
was before the house of the lord for there he offered burnt
offerings and meat offerings and the fat of the peace
offerings because the brasen altar that was before the lord
was too little to receive the burnt offerings and meat
offerings and the fat of the peace offerings.
and at that time Solomon held a feast and all Israel with
him a great congregation from the entering in of Hamath unto
the river of Egypt before the lord our God seven days and
seven days even fourteen days.
on the eighth day he sent the people away and they blessed
the king and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart
for all the goodness that the lord had done for David his
servant and for Israel his people.
and it came to pass when Solomon had finished the building of
the house of the lord and the king s house and all Solomon s
desire which he was pleased to do
that the lord appeared to Solomon the second time as he had
appeared unto him at Gibeon.
and the lord said unto him I have heard thy prayer and thy
supplication that thou hast made before me I have hallowed
this house which thou hast built to put my name there for
ever and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.
and if thou wilt walk before me as David thy father walked
in integrity of heart and in uprightness to do according to
all that I have commanded thee and wilt keep my statutes and
my judgments
then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel
for ever as I promised to David thy father saying there
shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel.
but if ye shall at all turn from following me ye or your
children and will not keep my commandments and my statutes
which I have set before you but go and serve other gods and
worship them
then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given
them and this house which I have hallowed for my name will
I cast out of my sight and Israel shall be a proverb and a
byword among all people
and at this house which is high every one that passeth by it
shall be astonished and shall hiss and they shall say why
hath the lord done thus unto this land and to this house?
and they shall answer because they forsook the lord their
God who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt
and have taken hold upon other gods and have worshipped them
and served them therefore hath the lord brought upon them all
this evil.
and it came to pass at the end of twenty years when Solomon
had built the two houses the house of the lord and the
king s house
 now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar
trees and fir trees and with gold according to all his
desire that then king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in
the land of Galilee.
and Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon
had given him and they pleased him not.
and he said what cities are these which thou hast given me
my brother? and he called them the land of Cabul unto this
day.
and Hiram sent to the king sixscore talents of gold.
and this is the reason of the levy which king Solomon raised
for to build the house of the lord and his own house and
Millo and the wall of Jerusalem and Hazor and Megiddo and
Gezer.
for Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up and taken Gezer and
burnt it with fire and slain the Canaanites that dwelt in the
city and given it for a present unto his daughter Solomon s
wife.
and Solomon built Gezer and Bethhoron the nether
and Baalath and Tadmor in the wilderness in the land
and all the cities of store that Solomon had and cities for
his chariots and cities for his horsemen and that which
Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem and in Lebanon and in
all the land of his dominion.
and all the people that were left of the Amorites Hittites
Perizzites Hivites and Jebusites which were not of the
children of Israel
their children that were left after them in the land whom the
children of Israel also were not able utterly to destroy upon
those did Solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.
but of the children of Israel did Solomon make no bondmen but
they were men of war and his servants and his princes and
his captains and rulers of his chariots and his horsemen.
these were the chief of the officers that were over Solomon s
work five hundred and fifty which bare rule over the people
that wrought in the work.
but Pharaoh s daughter came up out of the city of David unto
her house which Solomon had built for her then did he build
Millo.
and three times in a year did Solomon offer burnt offerings
and peace offerings upon the altar which he built unto the
lord and he burnt incense upon the altar that was before the
lord. so he finished the house.
and king Solomon made a navy of ships in Eziongeber which is
beside Eloth on the shore of the red sea in the land of
Edom.
and Hiram sent in the navy his servants shipmen that had
knowledge of the sea with the servants of Solomon.
and they came to Ophir and fetched from thence gold four
hundred and twenty talents and brought it to king Solomon.
and when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon
concerning the name of the lord she came to prove him with
hard questions.
and she came to Jerusalem with a very great train with camels
that bare spices and very Much gold and precious stones and
when she was come to Solomon she communed with him of all
that was in her heart.
and Solomon told her all her questions there was not any
thing hid from the king which he told her not.
and when the queen of Sheba had seen all Solomon s wisdom and
the house that he had built
and the meat of his table and the sitting of his servants
and the attendance of his ministers and their apparel and
his cupbearers and his ascent by which he went up unto the
house of the lord there was no more spirit in her.
and she said to the king it was a true report that I heard in
mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom.
howbeit I believed not the words until I came and mine eyes
had seen it and behold the half was not told me thy wisdom
and prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard.
happy are thy men happy are these thy servants which stand
continually before thee and that hear thy wisdom.
blessed be the lord thy God which delighted in thee to set
thee on the throne of Israel because the lord loved Israel
for ever therefore made he thee king to do judgment and
justice.
and she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold
and of spices very great store and precious stones there
came no more such abundance of spices as these which the queen
of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
and the navy also of Hiram that brought gold from Ophir
brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trees and
precious stones.
and the king made of the almug trees pillars for the house of
the lord and for the king s house harps also and psalteries
for singers there came no such almug trees nor were seen
unto this day.
and king Solomon gave unto the queen of Sheba all her desire
whatsoever she asked beside that which Solomon gave her of
his royal bounty. so she turned and went to her own country
she and her servants.
now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was
six hundred threescore and six talents of gold
beside that he had of the merchantmen and of the traffick of
the spice merchants and of all the kings of Arabia and of
the governors of the country.
and king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold six
hundred shekels of gold went to one target.
and he made three hundred shields of beaten gold three pound
of gold went to one shield and the king put them in the house
of the forest of Lebanon.
moreover the king made a great throne of ivory and overlaid
it with the best gold.
the throne had six steps and the top of the throne was round
behind and there were stays on either side on the place of
the seat and two lions stood beside the stays.
and twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other
upon the six steps there was not the like made in any
kingdom.
and all king Solomon s drinking vessels were of gold and all
the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure
gold none were of Silver it was nothing accounted of in the
days of Solomon.
for the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of
Hiram once in three years came the navy of Tharshish
bringing gold and Silver ivory and apes and peacocks.
so king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for Riches
and for wisdom.
and all the earth sought to Solomon to hear his wisdom which
God had put in his heart.
and they brought every man his present vessels of Silver and
vessels of gold and garments and armour and spices horses
and mules a rate year by year.
and Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen and he
had a thousand and four hundred chariots and twelve thousand
horsemen whom he bestowed in the cities for chariots and
with the king at Jerusalem.
and the king made Silver to be in Jerusalem as stones and
cedars made he to be as the sycomore trees that are in the
vale for abundance.
and Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt and linen yarn
the king s merchants received the linen yarn at a price.
and a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred
shekels of Silver and an horse for an hundred and fifty and
so for all the kings of the Hittites and for the kings of
Syria did they bring them out by their means.
but king Solomon loved many strange women together with the
daughter of Pharaoh women of the Moabites Ammonites
Edomites Zidonians and Hittites
of the nations concerning which the lord said unto the
children of Israel ye shall not go in to them Neither shall
they come in unto you for surely they will turn away your
heart after their gods Solomon clave unto these in love.
and he had seven hundred wives princesses and three hundred
concubines and his wives turned away his heart.
for it came to pass when Solomon was old that his wives
turned away his heart after other gods and his heart was not
perfect with the lord his God as was the heart of David his
father.
for Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians
and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.
and Solomon did evil in the sight of the lord and went not
fully after the lord as did David his father.
then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh the
abomination of Moab in the hill that is before Jerusalem and
for Molech the abomination of the children of Ammon.
and likewise did he for all his strange wives which burnt
incense and sacrificed unto their gods.
and the lord was angry with Solomon because his heart was
turned from the lord God of Israel which had appeared unto
him twice
and had commanded him concerning this thing that he should
not go after other gods but he kept not that which the lord
commanded.
wherefore the lord said unto Solomon forasmuch as this is
done of thee and thou hast not kept my covenant and my
statutes which I have commanded thee I will surely rend the
kingdom from thee and will give it to thy servant.
notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it for David thy
father s sake but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.
howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom but will give
one tribe to thy son for David my servant s sake and for
Jerusalem s sake which I have chosen.
and the lord stirred up an adversary unto Solomon Hadad the
Edomite he was of the king s seed in Edom.
for it came to pass when David was in Edom and Joab the
captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain after he
had smitten every Male in Edom
 for six months did Joab remain there with all Israel until
he had cut off every Male in Edom
that Hadad fled he and certain Edomites of his father s
servants with him to go into Egypt Hadad being yet a little
child.
and they arose out of Midian and came to Paran and they took
men with them out of Paran and they came to Egypt unto
Pharaoh king of Egypt which gave him an house and appointed
him victuals and gave him land.
and Hadad found great favour in the sight of Pharaoh so that
he gave him to wife the sister of his own wife the sister of
Tahpenes the queen.
and the sister of Tahpenes bare him Genubath his son whom
Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh s house and Genubath was in
Pharaoh s household among the sons of Pharaoh.
and when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his
fathers and that Joab the captain of the host was dead Hadad
said to Pharaoh let me depart that I may go to mine own
country.
then Pharaoh said unto him but what hast thou lacked with me
that behold thou seekest to go to thine own country? and he
answered nothing howbeit let me go in any wise.
and God stirred him up another adversary Rezon the son of
Eliadah which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah
and he gathered men unto him and became captain over a band
when David slew them of Zobah and they went to Damascus and
dwelt therein and reigned in Damascus.
and he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon
beside the mischief that Hadad did and he abhorred Israel
and reigned over Syria.
and Jeroboam the son of Nebat an Ephrathite of Zereda
Solomon s servant whose mother s name was Zeruah a widow
woman even he lifted up his hand against the king.
and this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the
king Solomon built Millo and repaired the breaches of the
city of David his father.
and the man Jeroboam was a Mighty man of valour and Solomon
seeing the young man that he was industrious he made him
ruler over all the charge of the house of Joseph.
and it came to pass at that time when Jeroboam went out of
Jerusalem that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in
the way and he had clad himself with a new garment and they
two were alone in the field
and Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him and rent it
in twelve pieces
and he said to Jeroboam take thee Ten pieces for thus saith
the lord the God of Israel behold I will rend the kingdom
out of the hand of Solomon and will give Ten tribes to thee
 but he shall have one tribe for my servant David s sake and
for Jerusalem s sake the city which I have chosen out of all
the tribes of Israel
because that they have forsaken me and have worshipped
Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians Chemosh the God of the
Moabites and Milcom the God of the children of Ammon and
have not walked in my ways to do that which is right in mine
eyes and to keep my statutes and my judgments as did David
his father.
howbeit I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand but
I will make him prince all the days of his life for David my
servant s sake whom I chose because he kept my commandments
and my statutes
but I will take the kingdom out of his son s hand and will
give it unto thee even Ten tribes.
and unto his son will I give one tribe that David my servant
may have a light alway before me in Jerusalem the city which
I have chosen me to put my name there.
and I will take thee and thou shalt reign according to all
that thy soul desireth and shalt be king over Israel.
and it shall be if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command
thee and wilt walk in my ways and do that is right in my
sight to keep my statutes and my commandments as David my
servant did that I will be with thee and build thee a sure
house as I built for David and will give Israel unto thee.
and I will for this afflict the seed of David but not for
ever.
Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam. and Jeroboam arose
and fled into Egypt unto Shishak king of Egypt and was in
Egypt until the death of Solomon.
and the rest of the acts of Solomon and all that he did and
his wisdom are they not written in the book of the acts of
Solomon?
and the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel
was forty years.
and Solomon slept with his fathers and was buried in the city
of David his father and Rehoboam his son reigned in his
stead.
and Rehoboam went to Shechem for all Israel were come to
Shechem to make him king.
and it came to pass when Jeroboam the son of Nebat who was
yet in Egypt heard of it for he was fled from the presence
of king Solomon and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt
that they sent and called him. and Jeroboam and all the
congregation of Israel came and spake unto Rehoboam saying
thy father made our yoke grievous now therefore make thou the
grievous service of thy father and his heavy yoke which he
put upon us lighter and we will serve thee.
and he said unto them depart yet for three days then come
again to me. and the people departed.
and king Rehoboam consulted with the old men that stood
before Solomon his father while he yet lived and said how do
ye advise that I may answer this people?
and they spake unto him saying if thou wilt be a servant
unto this people this day and wilt serve them and answer
them and speak good words to them then they will be thy
servants for ever.
but he forsook the counsel of the old men which they had
given him and consulted with the young men that were grown up
with him and which stood before him
and he said unto them what counsel give ye that we may answer
this people who have spoken to me saying make the yoke
which thy father did put upon us lighter?
and the young men that were grown up with him spake unto him
saying thus shalt thou speak unto this people that spake unto
thee saying thy father made our yoke heavy but make thou it
lighter unto us thus shalt thou say unto them my little
finger shall be thicker than my father s loins.
and now whereas my father did lade you with a heavy yoke I
will add to your yoke my father hath chastised you with
whips but I will chastise you with scorpions.
so Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day
as the king had appointed saying come to me again the third
day.
and the king answered the people roughly and forsook the old
men s counsel that they gave him
and spake to them after the counsel of the young men saying
my father made your yoke heavy and I will add to your yoke
my father also chastised you with whips but I will chastise
you with scorpions.
wherefore the king hearkened not unto the people for the
cause was from the lord that he might perform his saying
which the lord spake by Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam the
son of Nebat.
so when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them
the people answered the king saying what portion have we in
David? Neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse to
your tents O Israel now see to thine own house David. so
Israel departed unto their tents.
but as for the children of Israel which dwelt in the cities of
Judah Rehoboam reigned over them.
then king Rehoboam sent Adoram who was over the tribute and
all Israel stoned him with stones that he died. therefore
king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot to flee
to Jerusalem.
so Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.
and it came to pass when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was
come again that they sent and called him unto the
congregation and made him king over all Israel there was
none that followed the house of David but the tribe of Judah
only.
and when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem he assembled all the
house of Judah with the tribe of Benjamin an hundred and
fourscore thousand chosen men which were warriors to fight
against the house of Israel to bring the kingdom again to
Rehoboam the son of Solomon.
but the word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God saying
speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon king of Judah and
unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin and to the remnant
of the people saying
thus saith the lord ye shall not go up nor fight against
your brethren the children of Israel return every man to his
house for this thing is from me. they hearkened therefore to
the word of the lord and returned to depart according to the
word of the lord.
then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim and dwelt
therein and went out from thence and built Penuel.
and Jeroboam said in his heart now shall the kingdom return
to the house of David
if this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of the lord
at Jerusalem then shall the heart of this people turn again
unto their lord even unto Rehoboam king of Judah and they
shall kill me and go again to Rehoboam king of Judah.
whereupon the king took counsel and made two calves of gold
and said unto them it is too Much for you to go up to
Jerusalem behold thy gods O Israel which brought thee up
out of the land of Egypt.
and he set the one in Bethel and the other put he in Dan.
and this thing became a Sin for the people went to worship
before the one even unto Dan.
and he made an house of high places and made priests of the
lowest of the people which were not of the sons of Levi.
and Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month on the
fifteenth day of the month like unto the feast that is in
Judah and he offered upon the altar. so did he in Bethel
sacrificing unto the calves that he had made and he placed in
Bethel the priests of the high places which he had made.
so he offered upon the altar which he had made in Bethel the
fifteenth day of the eighth month even in the month which he
had devised of his own heart and ordained a feast unto the
children of Israel and he offered upon the altar and burnt
incense.
and behold there came a man of God out of Judah by the word
of the lord unto Bethel and Jeroboam stood by the altar to
burn incense.
and he cried against the altar in the word of the lord and
said O altar altar thus saith the lord behold a child
shall be born unto the house of David Josiah by name and
upon thee shall he offer the priests of the high places that
burn incense upon thee and men s bones shall be burnt upon
thee.
and he gave a sign the same day saying this is the sign
which the lord hath spoken behold the altar shall be rent
and the ashes that are upon it shall be poured out.
and it came to pass when king Jeroboam heard the saying of
the man of God which had cried against the altar in Bethel
that he put forth his hand from the altar saying lay hold on
him. and his hand which he put forth against him dried up
so that he could not pull it in again to him.
the altar also was rent and the ashes poured out from the
altar according to the sign which the man of God had given by
the word of the lord.
and the king answered and said unto the man of God intreat
now the face of the lord thy God and pray for me that my
hand may be restored me again. and the man of God besought the
lord and the king s hand was restored him again and became
as it was before.
and the king said unto the man of God come home with me and
refresh thyself and I will give thee a reward.
and the man of God said unto the king if thou wilt give me
half thine house I will not go in with thee Neither will I
eat bread nor drink water in this place
for so was it charged me by the word of the lord saying eat
no bread nor drink water nor turn again by the same way that
thou camest.
so he went another way and returned not by the way that he
came to Bethel.
now there dwelt an old prophet in Bethel and his sons came
and told him all the works that the man of God had done that
day in Bethel the words which he had spoken unto the king
them they told also to their father.
and their father said unto them what way went he? for his
sons had seen what way the man of God went which came from
Judah.
and he said unto his sons saddle me the ass. so they saddled
him the ass and he rode thereon
and went after the man of God and found him sitting under an
oak and he said unto him art thou the man of God that camest
from Judah? and he said I Am.
then he said unto him come home with me and eat bread.
and he said I may not return with thee nor go in with thee
Neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this
place
for it was said to me by the word of the lord thou shalt eat
no bread nor drink water there nor turn again to go by the
way that thou camest.
he said unto him I Am a prophet also as thou art and an
angel spake unto me by the word of the lord saying bring him
back with thee into thine house that he may eat bread and
drink water. but he lied unto him.
so he went back with him and did eat bread in his house and
drank water.
and it came to pass as they sat at the table that the word
of the lord came unto the prophet that brought him back
and he cried unto the man of God that came from Judah saying
thus saith the lord forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the
mouth of the lord and hast not kept the commandment which the
lord thy God commanded thee
but camest back and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the
place of the which the lord did say to thee eat no bread
and drink no water thy carcase shall not come unto the
sepulchre of thy fathers.
and it came to pass after he had eaten bread and after he
had drunk that he saddled for him the ass to wit for the
prophet whom he had brought back.
and when he was gone a lion met him by the way and slew him
and his carcase was cast in the way and the ass stood by it
the lion also stood by the carcase.
and behold men passed by and saw the carcase cast in the
way and the lion standing by the carcase and they came and
told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt.
and when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard
thereof he said it is the man of God who was disobedient
unto the word of the lord therefore the lord hath delivered
him unto the lion which hath torn him and slain him
according to the word of the lord which he spake unto him.
and he spake to his sons saying saddle me the ass. and they
saddled him.
and he went and found his carcase cast in the way and the ass
and the lion standing by the carcase the lion had not eaten
the carcase nor torn the ass.
and the prophet took up the carcase of the man of God and
laid it upon the ass and brought it back and the old prophet
came to the city to mourn and to bury him.
and he laid his carcase in his own grave and they mourned
over him saying alas my brother
and it came to pass after he had buried him that he spake to
his sons saying when I Am dead then bury me in the
sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried lay my bones
beside his bones
for the saying which he cried by the word of the lord against
the altar in Bethel and against all the houses of the high
places which are in the cities of Samaria shall surely come
to pass.
after this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way but
made again of the lowest of the people priests of the high
places whosoever would he consecrated him and he became one
of the priests of the high places.
and this thing became Sin unto the house of Jeroboam even to
cut it off and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.
at that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.
and Jeroboam said to his wife Arise I pray thee and
disguise thyself that thou be not known to be the wife of
Jeroboam and get thee to Shiloh behold there is Ahijah the
prophet which told me that I should be king over this people.
and take with thee Ten loaves and cracknels and a cruse of
honey and go to him he shall tell thee what shall become of
the child.
and Jeroboam s wife did so and arose and went to Shiloh and
came to the house of Ahijah. but Ahijah could not see for his
eyes were set by reason of his age.
and the lord said unto Ahijah behold the wife of Jeroboam
cometh to ask a thing of thee for her son for he is sick
thus and thus shalt thou say unto her for it shall be when
she cometh in that she shall feign herself to be another
woman.
and it was so when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet as she
came in at the door that he said come in thou wife of
Jeroboam why feignest thou thyself to be another? for I Am
sent to thee with heavy tidings.
go tell Jeroboam thus saith the lord God of Israel
forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people and made
thee prince over my people Israel
and rent the kingdom away from the house of David and gave it
thee and yet thou hast not been as my servant David who kept
my commandments and who followed me with all his heart to do
that only which was right in mine eyes
but hast done evil above all that were before thee for thou
hast gone and made thee other gods and molten images to
provoke me to anger and hast cast me behind thy back
therefore behold I will bring evil upon the house of
Jeroboam and will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth
against the wall and him that is shut up and left in Israel
and will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam as a
man taketh away dung till it be all gone.
him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat and
him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat
for the lord hath spoken it.
Arise thou therefore get thee to thine own house and when
thy feet enter into the city the child shall die.
and all Israel shall mourn for him and bury him for he only
of Jeroboam shall come to the grave because in him there is
found some good thing toward the lord God of Israel in the
house of Jeroboam.
moreover the lord shall raise him up a king over Israel who
shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day but what? even
now.
for the lord shall smite Israel as a reed is shaken in the
water and he shall root up Israel out of this good land
which he gave to their fathers and shall scatter them beyond
the river because they have made their groves provoking the
lord to anger.
and he shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam
who did Sin and who made Israel to Sin.
and Jeroboam s wife arose and departed and came to Tirzah
and when she came to the threshold of the door the child
died
and they buried him and all Israel mourned for him according
to the word of the lord which he spake by the hand of his
servant Ahijah the prophet.
and the rest of the acts of Jeroboam how he warred and how
he reigned behold they are written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel.
and the days which Jeroboam reigned were two and twenty years
and he slept with his fathers and Nadab his son reigned in
his stead.
and Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was
forty and one years old when he began to reign and he reigned
seventeen years in Jerusalem the city which the lord did
choose out of all the tribes of Israel to put his name there.
and his mother s name was Naamah an Ammonitess.
and Judah did evil in the sight of the lord and they provoked
him to jealousy with their sins which they had committed
above all that their fathers had done.
for they also built them high places and images and groves
on every high hill and under every green tree.
and there were also sodomites in the land and they did
according to all the abominations of the nations which the
lord cast out before the children of Israel.
and it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam that
Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem
and he took away the treasures of the house of the lord and
the treasures of the king s house he even took away all and
he took away all the shields of gold which Solomon had made.
and king Rehoboam made in their stead brasen shields and
committed them unto the hands of the chief of the guard which
kept the door of the king s house.
and it was so when the king went into the house of the lord
that the guard bare them and brought them back into the guard
chamber.
now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam and all that he did are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah?
and there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their
days.
and Rehoboam slept with his fathers and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David. and his mother s name was Naamah
an Ammonitess. and Abijam his son reigned in his stead.
now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat
reigned Abijam over Judah.
three years reigned he in Jerusalem. and his mother s name was
Maachah the daughter of Abishalom.
and he walked in all the sins of his father which he had done
before him and his heart was not perfect with the lord his
God as the heart of David his father.
nevertheless for David s sake did the lord his God give him a
lamp in Jerusalem to set up his son after him and to
establish Jerusalem
because David did that which was right in the eyes of the
lord and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded
him all the days of his life save only in the matter of Uriah
the Hittite.
and there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days
of his life.
now the rest of the acts of Abijam and all that he did are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah? and there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.
and Abijam slept with his fathers and they buried him in the
city of David and Asa his son reigned in his stead.
and in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned
Asa over Judah.
and forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem. and his
mother s name was Maachah the daughter of Abishalom.
and Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the lord as
did David his father.
and he took away the sodomites out of the land and removed
all the idols that his fathers had made.
and also Maachah his mother even her he removed from being
queen because she had made an idol in a grove and Asa
destroyed her idol and burnt it by the brook Kidron.
but the high places were not removed nevertheless Asa s heart
was perfect with the lord all his days.
and he brought in the things which his father had dedicated
and the things which himself had dedicated into the house of
the lord Silver and gold and vessels.
and there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all
their days.
and Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah and built
Ramah that he might not suffer any to go out or come in to
Asa king of Judah.
then Asa took all the Silver and the gold that were left in
the treasures of the house of the lord and the treasures of
the king s house and delivered them into the hand of his
servants and king Asa sent them to Benhadad the son of
Tabrimon the son of Hezion king of Syria that dwelt at
Damascus saying
there is a league between me and thee and between my father
and thy father behold I have sent unto thee a present of
Silver and gold come and break thy league with Baasha king of
Israel that he may depart from me.
so Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa and sent the captains of
the hosts which he had against the cities of Israel and smote
Ijon and Dan and Abelbethmaachah and all Cinneroth with
all the land of Naphtali.
and it came to pass when Baasha heard thereof that he left
off building of Ramah and dwelt in Tirzah.
then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Judah none
was exempted and they took away the stones of Ramah and the
timber thereof wherewith Baasha had builded and king Asa
built with them Geba of Benjamin and Mizpah.
the rest of all the acts of Asa and all his might and all
that he did and the cities which he built are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
nevertheless in the time of his old age he was diseased in his
feet.
and Asa slept with his fathers and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David his father and Jehoshaphat his
son reigned in his stead.
and Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in
the second year of Asa king of Judah and reigned over Israel
two years.
and he did evil in the sight of the lord and walked in the
way of his father and in his Sin wherewith he made Israel to
Sin.
and Baasha the son of Ahijah of the house of Issachar
conspired against him and Baasha smote him at Gibbethon
which belonged to the Philistines for Nadab and all Israel
laid siege to Gibbethon.
even in the third year of Asa king of Judah did Baasha slay
him and reigned in his stead.
and it came to pass when he reigned that he smote all the
house of Jeroboam he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed
until he had destroyed him according unto the saying of the
lord which he spake by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite
because of the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned and which he
made Israel Sin by his provocation wherewith he provoked the
lord God of Israel to anger.
now the rest of the acts of Nadab and all that he did are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Israel?
and there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all
their days.
in the third year of Asa king of Judah began Baasha the son of
Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah twenty and four
years.
and he did evil in the sight of the lord and walked in the
way of Jeroboam and in his Sin wherewith he made Israel to
Sin.
then the word of the lord came to Jehu the son of Hanani
against Baasha saying
forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust and made thee
prince over my people Israel and thou hast walked in the way
of Jeroboam and hast made my people Israel to Sin to provoke
me to anger with their sins
behold I will take away the posterity of Baasha and the
posterity of his house and will make thy house like the house
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
him that dieth of Baasha in the city shall the dogs eat and
him that dieth of his in the fields shall the fowls of the air
eat.
now the rest of the acts of Baasha and what he did and his
might are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel?
so Baasha slept with his fathers and was buried in Tirzah
and Elah his son reigned in his stead.
and also by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani
came the word of the lord against Baasha and against his
house even for all the evil that he did in the sight of the
lord in provoking him to anger with the work of his hands in
being like the house of Jeroboam and because he killed him.
in the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah
the son of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah two years.
and his servant Zimri captain of half his chariots conspired
against him as he was in Tirzah drinking himself drunk in
the house of Arza steward of his house in Tirzah.
and Zimri went in and smote him and killed him in the twenty
and seventh year of Asa king of Judah and reigned in his
stead.
and it came to pass when he began to reign as soon as he sat
on his throne that he slew all the house of Baasha he left
him not one that pisseth against a wall Neither of his
kinsfolks nor of his friends.
thus did Zimri destroy all the house of Baasha according to
the word of the lord which he spake against Baasha by Jehu
the prophet.
for all the sins of Baasha and the sins of Elah his son by
which they sinned and by which they made Israel to Sin in
provoking the lord God of Israel to anger with their vanities.
now the rest of the acts of Elah and all that he did are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Israel?
in the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri
reign seven days in Tirzah. and the people were encamped
against Gibbethon which belonged to the Philistines.
and the people that were encamped heard say Zimri hath
conspired and hath also slain the king wherefore all Israel
made Omri the captain of the host king over Israel that day
in the camp.
and Omri went up from Gibbethon and all Israel with him and
they besieged Tirzah.
and it came to pass when Zimri saw that the city was taken
that he went into the palace of the king s house and burnt
the king s house over him with fire and died.
for his sins which he sinned in doing evil in the sight of the
lord in walking in the way of Jeroboam and in his Sin which
he did to make Israel to Sin.
now the rest of the acts of Zimri and his treason that he
wrought are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel?
then were the people of Israel divided into two parts half of
the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath to make him king
and half followed Omri.
but the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people
that followed Tibni the son of Ginath so Tibni died and Omri
reigned.
in the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri
to reign over Israel twelve years six years reigned he in
Tirzah.
and he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of
Silver and built on the hill and called the name of the city
which he built after the name of Shemer owner of the hill
Samaria.
but Omri wrought evil in the eyes of the lord and did worse
than all that were before him.
for he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat and
in his Sin wherewith he made Israel to Sin to provoke the
lord God of Israel to anger with their vanities.
now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did and his might
that he shewed are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel?
so Omri slept with his fathers and was buried in Samaria and
Ahab his son reigned in his stead.
and in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began
Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel and Ahab the son of
Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years.
and Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the lord
above all that were before him.
and it came to pass as if it had been a light thing for him
to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat that he took
to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians
and went and served Baal and worshipped him.
and he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal which
he had built in Samaria.
and Ahab made a grove and Ahab did more to provoke the lord
God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were
before him.
in his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho he laid the
foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn and set up the
gates thereof in his youngest son Segub according to the word
of the lord which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun.
and Elijah the Tishbite who was of the inhabitants of Gilead
said unto Ahab as the lord God of Israel liveth before whom
I stand there shall not be dew nor rain these years but
according to my word.
and the word of the lord came unto him saying
get thee hence and turn thee eastward and hide thyself by
the brook Cherith that is before Jordan.
and it shall be that thou shalt drink of the brook and I
have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.
so he went and did according unto the word of the lord for he
went and dwelt by the brook Cherith that is before Jordan.
and the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning and
bread and flesh in the evening and he drank of the brook.
and it came to pass after a while that the brook dried up
because there had been no rain in the land.
and the word of the lord came unto him saying
Arise get thee to Zarephath which belongeth to Zidon and
dwell there behold I have commanded a widow woman there to
sustain thee.
so he arose and went to Zarephath. and when he came to the
gate of the city behold the widow woman was there gathering
of sticks and he called to her and said fetch me I pray
thee a little water in a vessel that I may drink.
and as she was going to fetch it he called to her and said
bring me I pray thee a morsel of bread in thine hand.
and she said as the lord thy God liveth I have not a cake
but an handful of meal in a barrel and a little oil in a
cruse and behold I Am gathering two sticks that I may go
in and dress it for me and my son that we may eat it and
die.
and Elijah said unto her fear not go and do as thou hast
said but make me thereof a little cake first and bring it
unto me and after make for thee and for thy son.
for thus saith the lord God of Israel the barrel of meal
shall not waste Neither shall the cruse of oil fail until
the day that the lord sendeth rain upon the earth.
and she went and did according to the saying of Elijah and
she and he and her house did eat many days.
and the barrel of meal wasted not Neither did the cruse of
oil fail according to the word of the lord which he spake by
Elijah.
and it came to pass after these things that the son of the
woman the mistress of the house fell sick and his sickness
was so sore that there was no breath left in him.
and she said unto Elijah what have I to do with thee O thou
man of God? art thou come unto me to call my Sin to
remembrance and to slay my son?
and he said unto her give me thy son. and he took him out of
her bosom and carried him up into a loft where he abode and
laid him upon his own bed.
and he cried unto the lord and said O lord my God hast thou
also brought evil upon the widow with whom I Sojourn by
slaying her son?
and he stretched himself upon the child three times and cried
unto the lord and said O lord my God I pray thee let this
child s soul come into him again.
and the lord heard the voice of Elijah and the soul of the
child came into him again and he revived.
and Elijah took the child and brought him down out of the
chamber into the house and delivered him unto his mother and
Elijah said see thy son liveth.
and the woman said to Elijah now by this I know that thou art
a man of God and that the word of the lord in thy mouth is
truth.
and it came to pass after many days that the word of the lord
came to Elijah in the third year saying go shew thyself
unto Ahab and I will send rain upon the earth.
and Elijah went to shew himself unto Ahab. and there was a
sore famine in Samaria.
and Ahab called Obadiah which was the Governor of his house.
 now Obadiah feared the lord greatly
for it was so when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the lord
that Obadiah took an hundred prophets and hid them by fifty
in a cave and fed them with bread and water.
and Ahab said unto Obadiah go into the land unto all
fountains of water and unto all brooks peradventure we may
find grass to save the horses and mules alive that we lose
not all the beasts.
so they divided the land between them to pass throughout it
Ahab went one way by himself and Obadiah went another way by
himself.
and as Obadiah was in the way behold Elijah met him and he
knew him and fell on his face and said art thou that my
lord Elijah?
and he answered him I Am go tell thy lord behold Elijah
is here.
and he said what have I sinned that thou wouldest deliver
thy servant into the hand of Ahab to slay me?
as the lord thy God liveth there is no nation or kingdom
whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee and when they
said he is not there he took an oath of the kingdom and
nation that they found thee not.
and now thou sayest go tell thy lord behold Elijah is
here.
and it shall come to pass as soon as I Am gone from thee
that the spirit of the lord shall carry thee whither I know
not and so when I come and tell Ahab and he cannot find
thee he shall slay me but I thy servant fear the lord from
my youth.
was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel slew the
prophets of the lord how I hid an hundred men of the lord s
prophets by fifty in a cave and fed them with bread and
water?
and now thou sayest go tell thy lord behold Elijah is
here and he shall slay me.
and Elijah said as the lord of hosts liveth before whom I
stand I will surely shew myself unto him to day.
so Obadiah went to meet Ahab and told him and Ahab went to
meet Elijah.
and it came to pass when Ahab saw Elijah that Ahab said unto
him art thou he that troubleth Israel?
and he answered I have not troubled Israel but thou and thy
father s house in that ye have forsaken the commandments of
the lord and thou hast followed Baalim.
now therefore send and gather to me all Israel unto mount
Carmel and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty and
the prophets of the groves four hundred which eat at
Jezebel s table.
so Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel and gathered the
prophets together unto mount Carmel.
and Elijah came unto all the people and said how long halt
ye between two opinions? if the lord be God follow him but
if Baal then follow him. and the people answered him not a
word.
then said Elijah unto the people I even I only remain a
prophet of the lord but Baal s prophets are four hundred and
fifty men.
let them therefore give us two bullocks and let them choose
one bullock for themselves and cut it in pieces and lay it
on wood and put no fire under and I will dress the other
bullock and lay it on wood and put no fire under
and call ye on the name of your gods and I will call on the
name of the lord and the God that answereth by fire let him
be God. and all the people answered and said it is well
spoken.
and Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal choose you one
bullock for yourselves and dress it first for ye are many
and call on the name of your gods but put no fire under.
and they took the bullock which was given them and they
dressed it and called on the name of Baal from morning even
until noon saying O Baal hear us. but there was no voice
nor any that answered. and they leaped upon the altar which
was made.
and it came to pass at noon that Elijah mocked them and
said cry aloud for he is a God either he is talking or he
is pursuing or he is in a journey or peradventure he
sleepeth and must be awaked.
and they cried aloud and cut themselves after their manner
with knives and lancets till the blood gushed out upon them.
and it came to pass when midday was past and they prophesied
until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice that
there was Neither voice nor any to answer nor any that
regarded.
and Elijah said unto all the people come near unto me. and
all the people came near unto him. and he repaired the altar
of the lord that was broken down.
and Elijah took twelve stones according to the number of the
tribes of the sons of Jacob unto whom the word of the lord
came saying Israel shall be thy name
and with the stones he built an altar in the name of the lord
and he made a trench about the altar as great as would
contain two measures of seed.
and he put the wood in order and cut the bullock in pieces
and laid him on the wood and said fill four barrels with
water and pour it on the burnt sacrifice and on the wood.
and he said do it the second time. and they did it the second
time. and he said do it the third time. and they did it the
third time.
and the water ran round about the altar and he filled the
trench also with water.
and it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening
sacrifice that Elijah the prophet came near and said lord
God of Abraham Isaac and of Israel let it be known this day
that thou art God in Israel and that I Am thy servant and
that I have done all these things at thy word.
hear me O lord hear me that this people may know that thou
art the lord God and that thou hast turned their heart back
again.
then the fire of the lord fell and consumed the burnt
sacrifice and the wood and the stones and the dust and
licked up the water that was in the trench.
and when all the people saw it they fell on their faces and
they said the lord he is the God the lord he is the God.
and Elijah said unto them take the prophets of Baal let not
one of them escape. and they took them and Elijah brought
them down to the brook Kishon and slew them there.
and Elijah said unto Ahab get thee up eat and drink for
there is a sound of abundance of rain.
so Ahab went up to eat and to drink. and Elijah went up to the
top of Carmel and he cast himself down upon the earth and
put his face between his knees
and said to his servant go up now look toward the sea. and
he went up and looked and said there is nothing. and he
said go again seven times.
and it came to pass at the seventh time that he said behold
there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea like a man s
hand. and he said go up say unto Ahab prepare thy chariot
and get thee down that the rain stop thee not.
and it came to pass in the mean while that the heaven was
black with clouds and wind and there was a great rain. and
Ahab rode and went to Jezreel.
and the hand of the lord was on Elijah and he girded up his
loins and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel.
and Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done and withal how
he had slain all the prophets with the sword.
then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah saying so let the
gods do to me and more also if I make not thy life as the
life of one of them by to morrow about this time.
and when he saw that he arose and went for his life and
came to Beersheba which belongeth to Judah and left his
servant there.
but he himself went a day s journey into the wilderness and
came and sat down under a juniper tree and he requested for
himself that he might die and said it is enough now O
lord take away my life for I Am not better than my fathers.
and as he lay and slept under a juniper tree behold then an
angel touched him and said unto him Arise and eat.
and he looked and behold there was a cake baken on the
coals and a cruse of water at his head. and he did eat and
drink and laid him down again.
and the angel of the lord came again the second time and
touched him and said Arise and eat because the journey is
too great for thee.
and he arose and did eat and drink and went in the strength
of that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount
of God.
and he came thither unto a cave and lodged there and
behold the word of the lord came to him and he said unto
him what doest thou here Elijah?
and he said I have been very jealous for the lord God of
hosts for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant
thrown down thine altars and slain thy prophets with the
sword and I even I only Am left and they seek my life to
take it away.
and he said go forth and stand upon the mount before the
lord. and behold the lord passed by and a great and strong
wind rent the mountains and brake in pieces the rocks before
the lord but the lord was not in the wind and after the wind
an earthquake but the lord was not in the earthquake
and after the earthquake a fire but the lord was not in the
fire and after the fire a still small voice.
and it was so when Elijah heard it that he wrapped his face
in his mantle and went out and stood in the entering in of
the cave. and behold there came a voice unto him and said
what doest thou here Elijah?
and he said I have been very jealous for the lord God of
hosts because the children of Israel have forsaken thy
covenant thrown down thine altars and slain thy prophets
with the sword and I even I only Am left and they seek my
life to take it away.
and the lord said unto him go return on thy way to the
wilderness of Damascus and when thou comest anoint Hazael to
be king over Syria
and Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over
Israel and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abelmeholah shalt
thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.
and it shall come to pass that him that escapeth the sword of
Hazael shall Jehu slay and him that escapeth from the sword
of Jehu shall Elisha slay.
yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel all the knees
which have not bowed unto Baal and every mouth which hath not
kissed him.
so he departed thence and found Elisha the son of Shaphat
who was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him and he
with the twelfth and Elijah passed by him and cast his
mantle upon him.
and he left the oxen and ran after Elijah and said let me
I pray thee Kiss my father and my mother and then I will
follow thee. and he said unto him go back again for what
have I done to thee?
and he returned back from him and took a yoke of oxen and
slew them and boiled their flesh with the instruments of the
oxen and gave unto the people and they did eat. then he
arose and went after Elijah and ministered unto him.
and Benhadad the king of Syria gathered all his host together
and there were thirty and two kings with him and horses and
chariots and he went up and besieged Samaria and warred
against it.
and he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into the city
and said unto him thus saith Benhadad
thy Silver and thy gold is mine thy wives also and thy
children even the goodliest are mine.
and the king of Israel answered and said my lord O king
according to thy saying I Am thine and all that I have.
and the messengers came again and said thus speaketh
Benhadad saying although I have sent unto thee saying thou
shalt deliver me thy Silver and thy gold and thy wives and
thy children
yet I will send my servants unto thee to morrow about this
time and they shall search thine house and the houses of thy
servants and it shall be that whatsoever is pleasant in
thine eyes they shall put it in their hand and take it away.
then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land and
said Mark I pray you and see how this man seeketh mischief
for he sent unto me for my wives and for my children and for
my Silver and for my gold and I denied him not.
and all the elders and all the people said unto him hearken
not unto him nor consent.
wherefore he said unto the messengers of Benhadad tell my
lord the king all that thou didst send for to thy servant at
the first I will do but this thing I may not do. and the
messengers departed and brought him word again.
and Benhadad sent unto him and said the gods do so unto me
and more also if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for
handfuls for all the people that follow me.
and the king of Israel answered and said tell him let not
him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that
putteth it off.
and it came to pass when Ben-hadad heard this message as he
was drinking he and the kings in the pavilions that he said
unto his servants set yourselves in array. and they set
themselves in array against the city.
and behold there came a prophet unto Ahab king of Israel
saying thus saith the lord hast thou seen all this great
multitude? behold I will deliver it into thine hand this day
and thou shalt know that I Am the lord.
and Ahab said by whom? and he said thus saith the lord even
by the young men of the princes of the provinces. then he
said who shall order the battle? and he answered thou.
then he numbered the young men of the princes of the
provinces and they were two hundred and thirty two and after
them he numbered all the people even all the children of
Israel being seven thousand.
and they went out at noon. but Benhadad was drinking himself
drunk in the pavilions he and the kings the thirty and two
kings that helped him.
and the young men of the princes of the provinces went out
first and Benhadad sent out and they told him saying there
are men come out of Samaria.
and he said whether they be come out for peace take them
alive or whether they be come out for war take them alive.
so these young men of the princes of the provinces came out of
the city and the army which followed them.
and they slew every one his man and the Syrians fled and
Israel pursued them and Benhadad the king of Syria escaped on
an horse with the horsemen.
and the king of Israel went out and smote the horses and
chariots and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter.
and the prophet came to the king of Israel and said unto him
go strengthen thyself and Mark and see what thou doest for
at the return of the year the king of Syria will come up
against thee.
and the servants of the king of Syria said unto him their
gods are gods of the hills therefore they were stronger than
we but let us fight against them in the plain and surely we
shall be stronger than they.
and do this thing take the kings away every man out of his
place and put captains in their rooms
and number thee an army like the army that thou hast lost
horse for horse and chariot for chariot and we will fight
against them in the plain and surely we shall be stronger
than they. and he hearkened unto their voice and did so.
and it came to pass at the return of the year that Benhadad
numbered the Syrians and went up to Aphek to fight against
Israel.
and the children of Israel were numbered and were all
present and went against them and the children of Israel
pitched before them like two little flocks of kids but the
Syrians filled the country.
and there came a man of God and spake unto the king of
Israel and said thus saith the lord because the Syrians
have said the lord is God of the hills but he is not God of
the valleys therefore will I deliver all this great multitude
into thine hand and ye shall know that I Am the lord.
and they pitched one over against the other seven days. and so
it was that in the seventh day the battle was joined and the
children of Israel slew of the Syrians an hundred thousand
footmen in one day.
but the rest fled to Aphek into the city and there a wall
fell upon twenty and seven thousand of the men that were left.
and Benhadad fled and came into the city into an inner
chamber.
and his servants said unto him behold now we have heard that
the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings let us I
pray thee put sackcloth on our loins and ropes upon our
heads and go out to the king of Israel peradventure he will
save thy life.
so they girded sackcloth on their loins and put ropes on
their heads and came to the king of Israel and said thy
servant Benhadad saith I pray thee let me live. and he said
is he yet alive? he is my brother.
now the men did diligently observe whether any thing would
come from him and did hastily catch it and they said thy
brother Benhadad. then he said go ye bring him. then
Benhadad came forth to him and he caused him to come up into
the chariot.
and Ben-hadad said unto him the cities which my father took
from thy father I will restore and thou shalt make streets
for thee in Damascus as my father made in Samaria. then said
Ahab I will send thee away with this covenant. so he made a
covenant with him and sent him away.
and a certain man of the sons of the prophets said unto his
neighbour in the word of the lord smite me I pray thee. and
the man refused to smite him.
then said he unto him because thou hast not obeyed the voice
of the lord behold as soon as thou art departed from me a
lion shall slay thee. and as soon as he was departed from him
a lion found him and slew him.
then he found another man and said smite me I pray thee.
and the man smote him so that in smiting he wounded him.
so the prophet departed and waited for the king by the way
and disguised himself with ashes upon his face.
and as the king passed by he cried unto the king and he
said thy servant went out into the midst of the battle and
behold a man turned aside and brought a man unto me and
said keep this man if by any means he be missing then shall
thy life be for his life or else thou shalt pay a talent of
Silver.
and as thy servant was busy here and there he was gone. and
the king of Israel said unto him so shall thy judgment be
thyself hast decided it.
and he hasted and took the ashes away from his face and the
king of Israel discerned him that he was of the prophets.
and he said unto him thus saith the lord because thou hast
let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter
destruction therefore thy life shall go for his life and thy
people for his people.
and the king of Israel went to his house heavy and displeased
and came to Samaria.
and it came to pass after these things that Naboth the
Jezreelite had a vineyard which was in Jezreel hard by the
palace of Ahab king of Samaria.
and Ahab spake unto Naboth saying give me thy vineyard that
I may have it for a garden of herbs because it is near unto
my house and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than
it or if it seem good to thee I will give thee the worth of
it in money.
and Naboth said to Ahab the lord forbid it me that I should
give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee.
and Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of
the word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him for he
had said I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers.
and he laid him down upon his bed and turned away his face
and would eat no bread.
but Jezebel his wife came to him and said unto him why is
thy spirit so sad that thou eatest no bread?
and he said unto her because I spake unto Naboth the
Jezreelite and said unto him give me thy vineyard for money
or else if it please thee I will give thee another vineyard
for it and he answered I will not give thee my vineyard.
and Jezebel his wife said unto him dost thou now govern the
kingdom of Israel? Arise and eat bread and let thine heart
be merry I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the
Jezreelite.
so she wrote letters in Ahab s name and sealed them with his
seal and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles
that were in his city dwelling with Naboth.
and she wrote in the letters saying proclaim a fast and set
Naboth on high among the people
and set two men sons of Belial before him to bear witness
against him saying thou didst blaspheme God and the king.
and then carry him out and stone him that he may die.
and the men of his city even the elders and the nobles who
were the inhabitants in his city did as Jezebel had sent unto
them and as it was written in the letters which she had sent
unto them.
they proclaimed a fast and set Naboth on high among the
people.
and there came in two men children of Belial and sat before
him and the men of Belial witnessed against him even against
Naboth in the presence of the people saying Naboth did
blaspheme God and the king. then they carried him forth out of
the city and stoned him with stones that he died.
then they sent to Jezebel saying Naboth is stoned and is
dead.
and it came to pass when Jezebel heard that Naboth was
stoned and was dead that Jezebel said to Ahab Arise take
possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite which he
refused to give thee for money for Naboth is not alive but
dead.
and it came to pass when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead
that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the
Jezreelite to take possession of it.
and the word of the lord came to Elijah the Tishbite saying
Arise go down to meet Ahab king of Israel which is in
Samaria behold he is in the vineyard of Naboth whither he
is gone down to possess it.
and thou shalt speak unto him saying thus saith the lord
hast thou killed and also taken possession? and thou shalt
speak unto him saying thus saith the lord in the place
where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy
blood even thine.
and Ahab said to Elijah hast thou found me O mine enemy? and
he answered I have found thee because thou hast sold thyself
to work evil in the sight of the lord.
behold I will bring evil upon thee and will take away thy
posterity and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against
the wall and him that is shut up and left in Israel
and will make thine house like the house of Jeroboam the son
of Nebat and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah for
the provocation wherewith thou hast provoked me to anger and
made Israel to Sin.
and of Jezebel also spake the lord saying the dogs shall eat
Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel.
him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat and him
that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat.
but there was none like unto Ahab which did sell himself to
work wickedness in the sight of the lord whom Jezebel his
wife stirred up.
and he did very abominably in following idols according to
all things as did the Amorites whom the lord cast out before
the children of Israel.
and it came to pass when Ahab heard those words that he rent
his clothes and put sackcloth upon his flesh and fasted and
lay in sackcloth and went softly.
and the word of the lord came to Elijah the Tishbite saying
seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me? because he
humbleth himself before me I will not bring the evil in his
days but in his son s days will I bring the evil upon his
house.
and they continued three years without war between Syria and
Israel.
and it came to pass in the third year that Jehoshaphat the
king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.
and the king of Israel said unto his servants know ye that
Ramoth in Gilead is ours and we be still and take it not out
of the hand of the king of Syria?
and he said unto Jehoshaphat wilt thou go with me to battle
to Ramothgilead? and Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel I
Am as thou art my people as thy people my horses as thy
horses.
and Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel enquire I pray
thee at the word of the lord to day.
then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together about
four hundred men and said unto them shall I go against
Ramothgilead to battle or shall I forbear? and they said go
up for the lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king.
and Jehoshaphat said is there not here a prophet of the lord
besides that we might enquire of him?
and the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat there is yet one
man Micaiah the son of Imlah by whom we may enquire of the
lord but I hate him for he doth not prophesy good concerning
me but evil. and Jehoshaphat said let not the king say so.
then the king of Israel called an officer and said hasten
hither Micaiah the son of Imlah.
and the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat
each on his throne having put on their robes in a void place
in the entrance of the gate of Samaria and all the prophets
prophesied before them.
and Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of Iron and
he said thus saith the lord with these shalt thou push the
Syrians until thou have consumed them.
and all the prophets prophesied so saying go up to
Ramothgilead and prosper for the lord shall deliver it into
the king s hand.
and the messenger that was gone to call Micaiah spake unto
him saying behold now the words of the prophets declare
good unto the king with one mouth let thy word I pray thee
be like the word of one of them and speak that which is good.
and Micaiah said as the lord liveth what the lord saith unto
me that will I speak.
so he came to the king. and the king said unto him Micaiah
shall we go against Ramothgilead to battle or shall we
forbear? and he answered him go and prosper for the lord
shall deliver it into the hand of the king.
and the king said unto him how many times shall I adjure thee
that thou tell me nothing but that which is true in the name
of the lord?
and he said I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills as
sheep that have not a Shepherd and the lord said these have
no Master let them return every man to his house in peace.
and the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat did I not tell
thee that he would prophesy no good concerning me but evil?
and he said hear thou therefore the word of the lord I saw
the lord sitting on his throne and all the host of heaven
standing by him on his right hand and on his left.
and the lord said who shall persuade Ahab that he may go up
and fall at Ramothgilead? and one said on this manner and
another said on that manner.
and there came forth a spirit and stood before the lord and
said I will persuade him.
and the lord said unto him wherewith? and he said I will go
forth and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his
prophets. and he said thou shalt persude him and prevail
also go forth and do so.
now therefore behold the lord hath put a lying spirit in the
mouth of all these thy prophets and the lord hath spoken evil
concerning thee.
but Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah went near and smote Micaiah
on the cheek and said which way went the spirit of the lord
from me to speak unto thee?
and Micaiah said behold thou shalt see in that day when
thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.
and the king of Israel said take Micaiah and carry him back
unto Amon the Governor of the city and to Joash the king s
son
and say thus saith the king put this fellow in the prison
and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of
affliction until I come in peace.
and Micaiah said if thou return at all in peace the lord
hath not spoken by me. and he said hearken O people every
one of you.
so the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went
up to Ramothgilead.
and the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat I will disguise
myself and enter into the battle but put thou on thy robes.
and the king of Israel disguised himself and went into the
battle.
but the king of Syria commanded his thirty and two captains
that had rule over his chariots saying fight Neither with
small nor great save only with the king of Israel.
and it came to pass when the captains of the chariots saw
Jehoshaphat that they said surely it is the king of Israel.
and they turned aside to fight against him and Jehoshaphat
cried out.
and it came to pass when the captains of the chariots
perceived that it was not the king of Israel that they turned
back from pursuing him.
and a certain man drew a bow at a venture and smote the king
of Israel between the joints of the harness wherefore he said
unto the driver of his chariot turn thine hand and carry me
out of the host for I Am wounded.
and the battle increased that day and the king was stayed up
in his chariot against the Syrians and died at even and the
blood ran out of the wound into the midst of the chariot.
and there went a proclamation throughout the host about the
going down of the sun saying every man to his city and
every man to his own country.
so the king died and was brought to Samaria and they buried
the king in Samaria.
and one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria and the
dogs licked up his blood and they washed his armour
according unto the word of the lord which he spake.
now the rest of the acts of Ahab and all that he did and the
ivory house which he made and all the cities that he built
are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel?
so Ahab slept with his fathers and Ahaziah his son reigned in
his stead.
and Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in
the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.
Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years old when he began to
reign and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. and
his mother s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
and he walked in all the ways of Asa his father he turned not
aside from it doing that which was right in the eyes of the
lord nevertheless the high places were not taken away for
the people offered and burnt incense yet in the high places.
and Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.
now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat and his might that he
shewed and how he warred are they not written in the book of
the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
and the remnant of the sodomites which remained in the days
of his father Asa he took out of the land.
there was then no king in Edom a deputy was king.
Jehoshaphat made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold
but they went not for the ships were broken at Eziongeber.
then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat let my
servants go with thy servants in the ships. but Jehoshaphat
would not.
and Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers and was buried with
his fathers in the city of David his father and Jehoram his
son reigned in his stead.
Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria
the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah and reigned
two years over Israel.
and he did evil in the sight of the lord and walked in the
way of his father and in the way of his mother and in the
way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to Sin
for he served Baal and worshipped him and provoked to anger
the lord God of Israel according to all that his father had
done.
then Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab.
and Ahaziah fell down through a lattice in his upper chamber
that was in Samaria and was sick and he sent messengers and
said unto them go enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron
whether I shall recover of this disease.
but the angel of the lord said to Elijah the Tishbite Arise
go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria and say
unto them is it not because there is not a God in Israel
that ye go to enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron?
now therefore thus saith the lord thou shalt not come down
from that bed on which thou art gone up but shalt surely die.
and Elijah departed.
and when the messengers turned back unto him he said unto
them why are ye now turned back?
and they said unto him there came a man up to meet us and
said unto us go turn again unto the king that sent you and
say unto him thus saith the lord is it not because there is
not a God in Israel that thou sendest to enquire of Baalzebub
the God of Ekron? therefore thou shalt not come down from that
bed on which thou art gone up but shalt surely die.
and he said unto them what manner of man was he which came up
to meet you and told you these words?
and they answered him he was an hairy man and girt with a
girdle of leather about his loins. and he said it is Elijah
the Tishbite.
then the king sent unto him a captain of fifty with his fifty.
and he went up to him and behold he sat on the top of an
hill. and he spake unto him thou man of God the king hath
said come down.
and Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty if I be
a man of God then let fire come down from heaven and consume
thee and thy fifty. and there came down fire from heaven and
consumed him and his fifty.
again also he sent unto him another captain of fifty with his
fifty. and he answered and said unto him O man of God thus
hath the king said come down quickly.
and Elijah answered and said unto them if I be a man of God
let fire come down from heaven and consume thee and thy
fifty. and the fire of God came down from heaven and consumed
him and his fifty.
and he sent again a captain of the third fifty with his fifty.
and the third captain of fifty went up and came and fell on
his knees before Elijah and besought him and said unto him
O man of God I pray thee let my life and the life of these
fifty thy servants be precious in thy sight.
behold there came fire down from heaven and burnt up the two
captains of the former fifties with their fifties therefore
let my life now be precious in thy sight.
and the angel of the lord said unto Elijah go down with him
be not afraid of him. and he arose and went down with him
unto the king.
and he said unto him thus saith the lord forasmuch as thou
hast sent messengers to enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron
is it not because there is no God in Israel to enquire of his
word? therefore thou shalt not come down off that bed on which
thou art gone up but shalt surely die.
so he died according to the word of the lord which Elijah had
spoken. and Jehoram reigned in his stead in the second year of
Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah because he had
no son.
now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
and it came to pass when the lord would take up Elijah into
heaven by a whirlwind that Elijah went with Elisha from
Gilgal.
and Elijah said unto Elisha tarry here I pray thee for the
lord hath sent me to Bethel. and Elisha said unto him as the
lord liveth and as thy soul liveth I will not leave thee. so
they went down to Bethel.
and the sons of the prophets that were at Bethel came forth to
Elisha and said unto him knowest thou that the lord will
take away thy Master from thy head to day? and he said yea I
know it hold ye your peace.
and Elijah said unto him Elisha tarry here I pray thee for
the lord hath sent me to Jericho. and he said as the lord
liveth and as thy soul liveth I will not leave thee. so they
came to Jericho.
and the sons of the prophets that were at Jericho came to
Elisha and said unto him knowest thou that the lord will
take away thy Master from thy head to day? and he answered
yea I know it hold ye your peace.
and Elijah said unto him tarry I pray thee here for the
lord hath sent me to Jordan. and he said as the lord liveth
and as thy soul liveth I will not leave thee. and they two
went on.
and fifty men of the sons of the prophets went and stood to
view afar off and they two stood by Jordan.
and Elijah took his mantle and wrapped it together and smote
the waters and they were divided hither and thither so that
they two went over on dry ground.
and it came to pass when they were gone over that Elijah
said unto Elisha ask what I shall do for thee before I be
taken away from thee. and Elisha said I pray thee let a
double portion of thy spirit be upon me.
and he said thou hast asked a hard thing nevertheless if
thou see me when I Am taken from thee it shall be so unto
thee but if not it shall not be so.
and it came to pass as they still went on and talked that
behold there appeared a chariot of fire and horses of fire
and parted them both asunder and Elijah went up by a
whirlwind into heaven.
and Elisha saw it and he cried my father my father the
chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof. and he saw him no
more and he took hold of his own clothes and rent them in
two pieces.
he took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him and
went back and stood by the bank of Jordan
and he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him and smote
the waters and said where is the lord God of Elijah? and
when he also had smitten the waters they parted hither and
thither and Elisha went over.
and when the sons of the prophets which were to view at
Jericho saw him they said the spirit of Elijah doth rest on
Elisha. and they came to meet him and bowed themselves to the
ground before him.
and they said unto him behold now there be with thy servants
fifty strong men let them go we pray thee and seek thy
Master lest peradventure the spirit of the lord hath taken
him up and cast him upon some mountain or into some valley.
and he said ye shall not send.
and when they urged him till he was ashamed he said send.
they sent therefore fifty men and they sought three days but
found him not.
and when they came again to him for he tarried at Jericho
he said unto them did I not say unto you go not?
and the men of the city said unto Elisha behold I pray thee
the situation of this city is pleasant as my lord seeth but
the water is naught and the ground barren.
and he said bring me a new cruse and put salt therein. and
they brought it to him.
and he went forth unto the spring of the waters and cast the
salt in there and said thus saith the lord I have healed
these waters there shall not be from thence any more death or
barren land.
so the waters were healed unto this day according to the
saying of Elisha which he spake.
and he went up from thence unto Bethel and as he was going up
by the way there came forth little children out of the city
and mocked him and said unto him go up thou bald head go
up thou bald head.
and he turned back and looked on them and cursed them in the
name of the lord. and there came forth two she bears out of
the wood and tare forty and two children of them.
and he went from thence to mount Carmel and from thence he
returned to Samaria.
now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in
Samaria the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah and
reigned twelve years.
and he wrought evil in the sight of the lord but not like his
father and like his mother for he put away the image of Baal
that his father had made.
nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat which made Israel to Sin he departed not therefrom.
and Mesha king of Moab was a sheepmaster and rendered unto
the king of Israel an hundred thousand lambs and an hundred
thousand rams with the wool.
but it came to pass when Ahab was dead that the king of Moab
rebelled against the king of Israel.
and king Jehoram went out of Samaria the same time and
numbered all Israel.
and he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah saying
the king of Moab hath rebelled against me wilt thou go with
me against Moab to battle? and he said I will go up I Am as
thou art my people as thy people and my horses as thy
horses.
and he said which way shall we go up? and he answered the
way through the wilderness of Edom.
so the king of Israel went and the king of Judah and the
king of Edom and they fetched a compass of seven days
journey and there was no water for the host and for the
cattle that followed them.
and the king of Israel said alas that the lord hath called
these three kings together to deliver them into the hand of
Moab
but Jehoshaphat said is there not here a prophet of the lord
that we may enquire of the lord by him? and one of the king of
Israel s servants answered and said here is Elisha the son of
Shaphat which poured water on the hands of Elijah.
and Jehoshaphat said the word of the lord is with him. so the
king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down
to him.
and Elisha said unto the king of Israel what have I to do
with thee? get thee to the prophets of thy father and to the
prophets of thy mother. and the king of Israel said unto him
nay for the lord hath called these three kings together to
deliver them into the hand of Moab.
and Elisha said as the lord of hosts liveth before whom I
stand surely were it not that I regard the presence of
Jehoshaphat the king of Judah I would not look toward thee
nor see thee.
but now bring me a minstrel. and it came to pass when the
minstrel played that the hand of the lord came upon him.
and he said thus saith the lord make this valley full of
ditches.
for thus saith the lord ye shall not see wind Neither shall
ye see rain yet that valley shall be filled with water that
ye may drink both ye and your cattle and your beasts.
and this is but a light thing in the sight of the lord he
will deliver the Moabites also into your hand.
and ye shall smite every fenced city and every choice city
and shall fell every good tree and stop all wells of water
and mar every good piece of land with stones.
and it came to pass in the morning when the meat offering was
offered that behold there came water by the way of Edom
and the country was filled with water.
and when all the Moabites heard that the kings were come up to
fight against them they gathered all that were able to put on
armour and upward and stood in the border.
and they rose up early in the morning and the sun shone upon
the water and the Moabites saw the water on the other side as
red as blood
and they said this is blood the kings are surely slain and
they have smitten one another now therefore Moab to the
spoil.
and when they came to the camp of Israel the Israelites rose
up and smote the Moabites so that they fled before them but
they went forward smiting the Moabites even in their country.
and they beat down the cities and on every good piece of land
cast every man his stone and filled it and they stopped all
the wells of water and felled all the good trees only in
Kirharaseth left they the stones thereof howbeit the slingers
went about it and smote it.
and when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too sore for
him he took with him seven hundred men that drew swords to
break through even unto the king of Edom but they could not.
then he took his eldest son that should have reigned in his
stead and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall. and
there was great indignation against Israel and they departed
from him and returned to their own land.
now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of
the prophets unto Elisha saying thy servant my husband is
dead and thou knowest that thy servant did fear the lord and
the creditor is come to take unto him my two sons to be
bondmen.
and Elisha said unto her what shall I do for thee? tell me
what hast thou in the house? and she said thine handmaid hath
not any thing in the house save a pot of oil.
then he said go borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy
neighbours even empty vessels borrow not a few.
and when thou art come in thou shalt shut the door upon thee
and upon thy sons and shalt pour out into all those vessels
and thou shalt set aside that which is full.
so she went from him and shut the door upon her and upon her
sons who brought the vessels to her and she poured out.
and it came to pass when the vessels were full that she said
unto her son bring me yet a vessel. and he said unto her
there is not a vessel more. and the oil stayed.
then she came and told the man of God. and he said go sell
the oil and pay thy debt and live thou and thy children of
the rest.
and it fell on a day that Elisha passed to Shunem where was
a great woman and she constrained him to eat bread. and so it
was that as oft as he passed by he turned in thither to eat
bread.
and she said unto her husband behold now I perceive that
this is an holy man of God which passeth by us continually.
let us make a little chamber I pray thee on the wall and
let us set for him there a bed and a table and a stool and
a candlestick and it shall be when he cometh to us that he
shall turn in thither.
and it fell on a day that he came thither and he turned into
the chamber and lay there.
and he said to Gehazi his servant call this Shunammite. and
when he had called her she stood before him.
and he said unto him say now unto her behold thou hast been
careful for us with all this care what is to be done for
thee? wouldest thou be spoken for to the king or to the
captain of the host? and she answered I dwell among mine own
people.
and he said what then is to be done for her? and Gehazi
answered verily she hath no child and her husband is old.
and he said call her. and when he had called her she stood
in the door.
and he said about this season according to the time of life
thou shalt embrace a son. and she said nay my lord thou man
of God do not lie unto thine handmaid.
and the woman conceived and bare a son at that season that
Elisha had said unto her according to the time of life.
and when the child was grown it fell on a day that he went
out to his father to the reapers.
and he said unto his father my head my head. and he said to
a lad carry him to his mother.
and when he had taken him and brought him to his mother he
sat on her knees till noon and then died.
and she went up and laid him on the bed of the man of God
and shut the door upon him and went out.
and she called unto her husband and said send me I pray
thee one of the young men and one of the asses that I may
run to the man of God and come again.
and he said wherefore wilt thou go to him to day? it is
Neither new moon nor sabbath. and she said it shall be well.
then she saddled an ass and said to her servant drive and
go forward slack not thy riding for me except I bid thee.
so she went and came unto the man of God to mount Carmel. and
it came to pass when the man of God saw her afar off that he
said to Gehazi his servant behold yonder is that Shunammite
run now I pray thee to meet her and say unto her is it
well with thee? is it well with thy husband? is it well with
the child? and she answered it is well
and when she came to the man of God to the hill she caught
him by the feet but Gehazi came near to thrust her away. and
the man of God said let her alone for her soul is vexed
within her and the lord hath hid it from me and hath not
told me.
then she said did I desire a son of my lord? did I not say
do not deceive me?
then he said to Gehazi gird up thy loins and take my staff
in thine hand and go thy way if thou meet any man salute
him not and if any salute thee answer him not again and lay
my staff upon the face of the child.
and the mother of the child said as the lord liveth and as
thy soul liveth I will not leave thee. and he arose and
followed her.
and Gehazi passed on before them and laid the staff upon the
face of the child but there was Neither voice nor hearing.
wherefore he went again to meet him and told him saying the
child is not awaked.
and when Elisha was come into the house behold the child was
dead and laid upon his bed.
he went in therefore and shut the door upon them twain and
prayed unto the lord.
and he went up and lay upon the child and put his mouth upon
his mouth and his eyes upon his eyes and his hands upon his
hands and stretched himself upon the child and the flesh of
the child waxed warm.
then he returned and walked in the house to and fro and went
up and stretched himself upon him and the child sneezed
seven times and the child opened his eyes.
and he called Gehazi and said call this Shunammite. so he
called her. and when she was come in unto him he said take
up thy son.
then she went in and fell at his feet and bowed herself to
the ground and took up her son and went out.
and Elisha came again to Gilgal and there was a dearth in the
land and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him
and he said unto his servant set on the great pot and seethe
pottage for the sons of the prophets.
and one went out into the field to gather herbs and found a
wild vine and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full and
came and shred them into the pot of pottage for they knew
them not.
so they poured out for the men to eat. and it came to pass as
they were eating of the pottage that they cried out and
said O thou man of God there is death in the pot. and they
could not eat thereof.
but he said then bring meal. and he cast it into the pot and
he said pour out for the people that they may eat. and there
was no harm in the pot.
and there came a man from Baalshalisha and brought the man of
God bread of the firstfruits twenty loaves of barley and
full ears of corn in the husk thereof. and he said give unto
the people that they may eat.
and his servitor said what should I set this before an
hundred men? he said again give the people that they may
eat for thus saith the lord they shall eat and shall leave
thereof.
so he set it before them and they did eat and left thereof
according to the word of the lord.
now Naaman captain of the host of the king of Syria was a
great man with his Master and honourable because by him the
lord had given deliverance unto Syria he was also a Mighty
man in valour but he was a leper.
and the Syrians had gone out by companies and had brought
away captive out of the land of Israel a little maid and she
waited on Naaman s wife.
and she said unto her mistress would God my lord were with
the prophet that is in Samaria for he would recover him of
his leprosy.
and one went in and told his lord saying thus and thus said
the maid that is of the land of Israel.
and the king of Syria said go to go and I will send a
letter unto the king of Israel. and he departed and took with
him Ten talents of Silver and six thousand pieces of gold
and Ten changes of raiment.
and he brought the letter to the king of Israel saying now
when this letter is come unto thee behold I have therewith
sent Naaman my servant to thee that thou mayest recover him
of his leprosy.
and it came to pass when the king of Israel had read the
letter that he rent his clothes and said Am I God to kill
and to make alive that this man doth send unto me to recover
a man of his leprosy? wherefore consider I pray you and see
how he seeketh a quarrel against me.
and it was so when Elisha the man of God had heard that the
king of Israel had rent his clothes that he sent to the king
saying wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come now
to me and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.
so Naaman came with his horses and with his chariot and stood
at the door of the house of Elisha.
and Elisha sent a messenger unto him saying go and wash in
Jordan seven times and thy flesh shall come again to thee
and thou shalt be clean.
but Naaman was wroth and went away and said behold I
thought he will surely come out to me and stand and call on
the name of the lord his God and strike his hand over the
place and recover the leper.
are not Abana and Pharpar rivers of Damascus better than all
the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them and be clean? so
he turned and went away in a rage.
and his servants came near and spake unto him and said my
father if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing
wouldest thou not have done it? how Much rather then when he
saith to thee wash and be clean?
then went he down and dipped himself seven times in Jordan
according to the saying of the man of God and his flesh came
again like unto the flesh of a little child and he was clean.
and he returned to the man of God he and all his company and
came and stood before him and he said behold now I know
that there is no God in all the earth but in Israel now
therefore I pray thee take a blessing of thy servant.
but he said as the lord liveth before whom I stand I will
receive none. and he urged him to take it but he refused.
and Naaman said shall there not then I pray thee be given
to thy servant two mules burden of earth? for thy servant
will henceforth offer Neither burnt offering nor sacrifice
unto other gods but unto the lord.
in this thing the lord pardon thy servant that when my Master
goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there and he
leaneth on my hand and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon
when I bow down myself in the house of Rimmon the lord pardon
thy servant in this thing.
and he said unto him go in peace. so he departed from him a
little way.
but Gehazi the servant of Elisha the man of God said
behold my Master hath spared Naaman this Syrian in not
receiving at his hands that which he brought but as the lord
liveth I will run after him and take somewhat of him.
so Gehazi followed after Naaman. and when Naaman saw him
running after him he lighted down from the chariot to meet
him and said is all well?
and he said all is well. my Master hath sent me saying
behold even now there be come to me from mount Ephraim two
young men of the sons of the prophets give them I pray thee
a talent of Silver and two changes of garments.
and Naaman said be content take two talents. and he urged
him and bound two talents of Silver in two bags with two
changes of garments and laid them upon two of his servants
and they bare them before him.
and when he came to the tower he took them from their hand
and bestowed them in the house and he let the men go and
they departed.
but he went in and stood before his Master. and Elisha said
unto him whence comest thou Gehazi? and he said thy servant
went no whither.
and he said unto him went not mine heart with thee when the
man turned again from his chariot to meet thee? is it a time
to receive money and to receive garments and oliveyards and
vineyards and sheep and oxen and menservants and
maidservants?
the leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee and
unto thy seed for ever. and he went out from his presence a
leper as white as snow.
and the sons of the prophets said unto Elisha behold now the
place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.
let us go we pray thee unto Jordan and take thence every
man a beam and let us make us a place there where we may
dwell. and he answered go ye.
and one said be content I pray thee and go with thy
servants. and he answered I will go.
so he went with them. and when they came to Jordan they cut
down wood.
but as one was felling a beam the axe head fell into the
water and he cried and said alas Master for it was
borrowed.
and the man of God said where fell it? and he shewed him the
place. and he cut down a stick and cast it in thither and
the Iron did swim.
therefore said he take it up to thee. and he put out his
hand and took it.
then the king of Syria warred against Israel and took counsel
with his servants saying in such and such a place shall be
my camp.
and the man of God sent unto the king of Israel saying
beware that thou pass not such a place for thither the
Syrians are come down.
and the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God
told him and warned him of and saved himself there not once
nor twice.
therefore the heart of the king of Syria was sore troubled for
this thing and he called his servants and said unto them
will ye not shew me which of us is for the king of Israel?
and one of his servants said none my lord O king but
Elisha the prophet that is in Israel telleth the king of
Israel the words that thou speakest in thy bedchamber.
and he said go and spy where he is that I may send and fetch
him. and it was told him saying behold he is in Dothan.
therefore sent he thither horses and chariots and a great
host and they came by night and compassed the city about.
and when the servant of the man of God was risen early and
gone forth behold an host compassed the city both with
horses and chariots. and his servant said unto him alas my
Master how shall we do?
and he answered fear not for they that be with us are more
than they that be with them.
and Elisha prayed and said lord I pray thee open his eyes
that he may see. and the lord opened the eyes of the young
man and he saw and behold the mountain was full of horses
and chariots of fire round about Elisha.
and when they came down to him Elisha prayed unto the lord
and said smite this people I pray thee with blindness. and
he smote them with blindness according to the word of Elisha.
and Elisha said unto them this is not the way Neither is
this the city follow me and I will bring you to the man whom
ye seek. but he led them to Samaria.
and it came to pass when they were come into Samaria that
Elisha said lord open the eyes of these men that they may
see. and the lord opened their eyes and they saw and
behold they were in the midst of Samaria.
and the king of Israel said unto Elisha when he saw them my
father shall I smite them? shall I smite them?
and he answered thou shalt not smite them wouldest thou
smite those whom thou hast taken captive with thy sword and
with thy bow? set bread and water before them that they may
eat and drink and go to their Master.
and he prepared great provision for them and when they had
eaten and drunk he sent them away and they went to their
Master. so the Bands of Syria came no more into the land of
Israel.
and it came to pass after this that Benhadad king of Syria
gathered all his host and went up and besieged Samaria.
and there was a great famine in Samaria and behold they
besieged it until an ass s head was sold for fourscore pieces
of Silver and the fourth part of a cab of dove s dung for
five pieces of Silver.
and as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall there
cried a woman unto him saying help my lord O king.
and he said if the lord do not help thee whence shall I help
thee? out of the barnfloor or out of the winepress?
and the king said unto her what aileth thee? and she
answered this woman said unto me give thy son that we may
eat him to day and we will eat my son to morrow.
so we boiled my son and did eat him and I said unto her on
the next day give thy son that we may eat him and she hath
hid her son.
and it came to pass when the king heard the words of the
woman that he rent his clothes and he passed by upon the
wall and the people looked and behold he had sackcloth
within upon his flesh.
then he said God do so and more also to me if the head of
Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day.
but Elisha sat in his house and the elders sat with him and
the king sent a man from before him but ere the messenger
came to him he said to the elders see ye how this son of a
murderer hath sent to take away mine head? look when the
messenger cometh shut the door and hold him fast at the
door is not the sound of his Master s feet behind him?
and while he yet talked with them behold the messenger came
down unto him and he said behold this evil is of the lord
what should I wait for the lord any longer?
then Elisha said hear ye the word of the lord thus saith the
lord to morrow about this time shall a measure of fine flour
be sold for a shekel and two measures of barley for a shekel
in the gate of Samaria.
then a lord on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of
God and said behold if the lord would make windows in
heaven might this thing be? and he said behold thou shalt
see it with thine eyes but shalt not eat thereof.
and there were four leprous men at the entering in of the
gate and they said one to another why sit we here until we
die?
if we say we will enter into the city then the famine is in
the city and we shall die there and if we sit still here we
die also. now therefore come and let us fall unto the host of
the Syrians if they save us alive we shall live and if they
kill us we shall but die.
and they rose up in the twilight to go unto the camp of the
Syrians and when they were come to the uttermost part of the
camp of Syria behold there was no man there.
for the lord had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise
of chariots and a noise of horses even the noise of a great
host and they said one to another lo the king of Israel
hath hired against us the kings of the Hittites and the kings
of the Egyptians to come upon us.
wherefore they arose and fled in the twilight and left their
tents and their horses and their asses even the camp as it
was and fled for their life.
and when these lepers came to the uttermost part of the camp
they went into one tent and did eat and drink and carried
thence Silver and gold and raiment and went and hid it and
came again and entered into another tent and carried thence
also and went and hid it.
then they said one to another we do not well this day is a
day of good tidings and we hold our peace if we tarry till
the morning light some mischief will come upon us now
therefore come that we may go and tell the king s household.
so they came and called unto the porter of the city and they
told them saying we came to the camp of the Syrians and
behold there was no man there Neither voice of man but
horses tied and asses tied and the tents as they were.
and he called the porters and they told it to the king s
house within.
and the king arose in the night and said unto his servants I
will now shew you what the Syrians have done to us. they know
that we be hungry therefore are they gone out of the camp to
hide themselves in the field saying when they come out of
the city we shall catch them alive and get into the city.
and one of his servants answered and said let some take I
pray thee five of the horses that remain which are left in
the city behold they are as all the multitude of Israel
that are left in it behold I say they are even as all the
multitude of the Israelites that are consumed and let us
send and see.
they took therefore two chariot horses and the king sent
after the host of the Syrians saying go and see.
and they went after them unto Jordan and lo all the way was
full of garments and vessels which the Syrians had cast away
in their haste. and the messengers returned and told the
king.
and the people went out and spoiled the tents of the Syrians.
so a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel and two
measures of barley for a shekel according to the word of the
lord.
and the king appointed the lord on whose hand he leaned to
have the charge of the gate and the people trode upon him in
the gate and he died as the man of God had said who spake
when the king came down to him.
and it came to pass as the man of God had spoken to the king
saying two measures of barley for a shekel and a measure of
fine flour for a shekel shall be to morrow about this time in
the gate of Samaria
and that lord answered the man of God and said now behold
if the lord should make windows in heaven might such a thing
be? and he said behold thou shalt see it with thine eyes
but shalt not eat thereof.
and so it fell out unto him for the people trode upon him in
the gate and he died.
then spake Elisha unto the woman whose son he had restored to
life saying Arise and go thou and thine household and
Sojourn wheresoever thou canst Sojourn for the lord hath
called for a famine and it shall also come upon the land
seven years.
and the woman arose and did after the saying of the man of
God and she went with her household and sojourned in the
land of the Philistines seven years.
and it came to pass at the seven years end that the woman
returned out of the land of the Philistines and she went
forth to cry unto the king for her house and for her land.
and the king talked with Gehazi the servant of the man of God
saying tell me I pray thee all the great things that Elisha
hath done.
and it came to pass as he was telling the king how he had
restored a dead body to life that behold the woman whose
son he had restored to life cried to the king for her house
and for her land. and Gehazi said my lord O king this is
the woman and this is her son whom Elisha restored to life.
and when the king asked the woman she told him. so the king
appointed unto her a certain officer saying restore all that
was hers and all the fruits of the field since the day that
she left the land even until now.
and Elisha came to Damascus and Benhadad the king of Syria
was sick and it was told him saying the man of God is come
hither.
and the king said unto Hazael take a present in thine hand
and go meet the man of God and enquire of the lord by him
saying shall I recover of this disease?
so Hazael went to meet him and took a present with him even
of every good thing of Damascus forty camels burden and
came and stood before him and said thy son Benhadad king of
Syria hath sent me to thee saying shall I recover of this
disease?
and Elisha said unto him go say unto him thou mayest
certainly recover howbeit the lord hath shewed me that he
shall surely die.
and he settled his countenance stedfastly until he was
ashamed and the man of God wept.
and Hazael said why weepeth my lord? and he answered because
I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel
their strong holds wilt thou set on fire and their young men
wilt thou slay with the sword and wilt dash their children
and rip up their women with child.
and Hazael said but what is thy servant a dog that he
should do this great thing? and Elisha answered the lord hath
shewed me that thou shalt be king over Syria.
so he departed from Elisha and came to his Master who said
to him what said Elisha to thee? and he answered he told me
that thou shouldest surely recover.
and it came to pass on the morrow that he took a thick cloth
and dipped it in water and spread it on his face so that he
died and Hazael reigned in his stead.
and in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel
Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah Jehoram the son of Je
hoshaphat king of Judah began to reign.
thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign and he
reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
and he walked in the way of the kings of Israel as did the
house of Ahab for the daughter of Ahab was his wife and he
did evil in the sight of the lord.
yet the lord would not destroy Judah for David his servant s
sake as he promised him to give him alway a light and to his
children.
in his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah and
made a king over themselves.
so Joram went over to Zair and all the chariots with him and
he rose by night and smote the Edomites which compassed him
about and the captains of the chariots and the people fled
into their tents.
yet Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day.
then Libnah revolted at the same time.
and the rest of the acts of Joram and all that he did are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah?
and Joram slept with his fathers and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David and Ahaziah his son reigned in
his stead.
in the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel
did Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah begin to reign.
two and twenty years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign
and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. and his mother s name
was Athaliah the daughter of Omri king of Israel.
and he walked in the way of the house of Ahab and did evil in
the sight of the lord as did the house of Ahab for he was
the son in law of the house of Ahab.
and he went with Joram the son of Ahab to the war against
Hazael king of Syria in Ramothgilead and the Syrians wounded
Joram.
and king Joram went back to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds
which the Syrians had given him at Ramah when he fought
against Hazael king of Syria. and Ahaziah the son of Jehoram
king of Judah went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in
Jezreel because he was sick.
and Elisha the prophet called one of the children of the
prophets and said unto him gird up thy loins and take this
box of oil in thine hand and go to Ramothgilead
and when thou comest thither look out there Jehu the son of
Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi and go in and make him Arise
up from among his brethren and carry him to an inner chamber
then take the box of oil and pour it on his head and say
thus saith the lord I have anointed thee king over Israel.
then open the door and flee and tarry not.
so the young man even the young man the prophet went to
Ramothgilead.
and when he came behold the captains of the host were
sitting and he said I have an errand to thee O captain. and
Jehu said unto which of all us? and he said to thee O
captain.
and he arose and went into the house and he poured the oil
on his head and said unto him thus saith the lord God of
Israel I have anointed thee king over the people of the lord
even over Israel.
and thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy Master that I may
avenge the blood of my servants the prophets and the blood of
all the servants of the lord at the hand of Jezebel.
for the whole house of Ahab shall perish and I will cut off
from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall and him that is
shut up and left in Israel
and I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam
the son of Nebat and like the house of Baasha the son of
Ahijah
and the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel and
there shall be none to bury her. and he opened the door and
fled.
then Jehu came forth to the servants of his lord and one said
unto him is all well? wherefore came this mad fellow to thee?
and he said unto them ye know the man and his communication.
and they said it is false tell us now. and he said thus and
thus spake he to me saying thus saith the lord I have
anointed thee king over Israel.
then they hasted and took every man his garment and put it
under him on the top of the stairs and blew with trumpets
saying Jehu is king.
so Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired
against Joram. now Joram had kept Ramothgilead he and all
Israel because of Hazael king of Syria.
but king Joram was returned to be healed in Jezreel of the
wounds which the Syrians had given him when he fought with
Hazael king of Syria. and Jehu said if it be your minds
then let none go forth nor escape out of the city to go to
tell it in Jezreel.
so Jehu rode in a chariot and went to Jezreel for Joram lay
there. and Ahaziah king of Judah was come down to see Joram.
and there stood a watchman on the tower in Jezreel and he
spied the company of Jehu as he came and said I see a
company. and Joram said take an horseman and send to meet
them and let him say is it peace?
so there went one on horseback to meet him and said thus
saith the king is it peace? and Jehu said what hast thou to
do with peace? turn thee behind me. and the watchman told
saying the messenger came to them but he cometh not again.
then he sent out a second on horseback which came to them
and said thus saith the king is it peace? and Jehu answered
what hast thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.
and the watchman told saying he came even unto them and
cometh not again and the driving is like the driving of Jehu
the son of Nimshi for he driveth furiously.
and Joram said make ready. and his chariot was made ready.
and Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out
each in his chariot and they went out against Jehu and met
him in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite.
and it came to pass when Joram saw Jehu that he said is it
peace Jehu? and he answered what peace so long as the
whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so
many?
and Joram turned his hands and fled and said to Ahaziah
there is treachery O Ahaziah.
and Jehu drew a bow with his full strength and smote Jehoram
between his arms and the arrow went out at his heart and he
sunk down in his chariot.
then said Jehu to Bidkar his captain take up and cast him in
the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite for
remember how that when I and thou rode together after Ahab
his father the lord laid this burden upon him
surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth and the
blood of his sons saith the lord and I will requite thee in
this plat saith the lord. now therefore take and cast him
into the plat of ground according to the word of the lord.
but when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this he fled by the
way of the garden house. and Jehu followed after him and
said smite him also in the chariot. and they did so at the
going up to Gur which is by Ibleam. and he fled to Megiddo
and died there.
and his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem and
buried him in his sepulchre with his fathers in the city of
David.
and in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab began
Ahaziah to reign over Judah.
and when Jehu was come to Jezreel Jezebel heard of it and
she painted her face and tired her head and looked out at a
window.
and as Jehu entered in at the gate she said had Zimri peace
who slew his Master?
and he lifted up his face to the window and said who is on
my side? who? and there looked out to him two or three
eunuchs.
and he said throw her down. so they threw her down and some
of her blood was sprinkled on the wall and on the horses and
he trode her under foot.
and when he was come in he did eat and drink and said go
see now this cursed woman and bury her for she is a king s
daughter.
and they went to bury her but they found no more of her than
the skull and the feet and the palms of her hands.
wherefore they came again and told him. and he said this is
the word of the lord which he spake by his servant Elijah the
Tishbite saying in the portion of Jezreel shall dogs eat the
flesh of Jezebel
and the carcase of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of
the field in the portion of Jezreel so that they shall not
say this is Jezebel.
and Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. and Jehu wrote letters
and sent to Samaria unto the rulers of Jezreel to the
elders and to them that brought up Ahab s children saying
now as soon as this letter cometh to you seeing your Master s
sons are with you and there are with you chariots and horses
a fenced city also and armour
look even out the best and meetest of your Master s sons and
set him on his father s throne and fight for your Master s
house.
but they were exceedingly afraid and said behold two kings
stood not before him how then shall we stand?
and he that was over the house and he that was over the city
the elders also and the bringers up of the children sent to
Jehu saying we are thy servants and will do all that thou
shalt bid us we will not make any king do thou that which is
good in thine eyes.
then he wrote a letter the second time to them saying if ye
be mine and if ye will hearken unto my voice take ye the
heads of the men your Master s sons and come to me to Jezreel
by to morrow this time. now the king s sons being seventy
persons were with the great men of the city which brought
them up.
and it came to pass when the letter came to them that they
took the king s sons and slew seventy persons and put their
heads in baskets and sent him them to Jezreel.
and there came a messenger and told him saying they have
brought the heads of the king s sons. and he said lay ye them
in two heaps at the entering in of the gate until the morning.
and it came to pass in the morning that he went out and
stood and said to all the people ye be righteous behold I
conspired against my Master and slew him but who slew all
these?
know now that there shall fall unto the earth nothing of the
word of the lord which the lord spake concerning the house of
Ahab for the lord hath done that which he spake by his
servant Elijah.
so Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in
Jezreel and all his great men and his kinsfolks and his
priests until he left him none remaining.
and he arose and departed and came to Samaria. and as he was
at the shearing house in the way
Jehu met with the brethren of Ahaziah king of Judah and said
who are ye? and they answered we are the brethren of Ahaziah
and we go down to salute the children of the king and the
children of the queen.
and he said take them alive. and they took them alive and
slew them at the pit of the shearing house even two and forty
men Neither left he any of them.
and when he was departed thence he lighted on Jehonadab the
son of Rechab coming to meet him and he saluted him and said
to him is thine heart right as my heart is with thy heart?
and Jehonadab answered it is. if it be give me thine hand.
and he gave him his hand and he took him up to him into the
chariot.
and he said come with me and see my zeal for the lord. so
they made him ride in his chariot.
and when he came to Samaria he slew all that remained unto
Ahab in Samaria till he had destroyed him according to the
saying of the lord which he spake to Elijah.
and Jehu gathered all the people together and said unto them
Ahab served Baal a little but Jehu shall serve him Much.
now therefore call unto me all the prophets of Baal all his
servants and all his priests let none be wanting for I have
a great sacrifice to do to Baal whosoever shall be wanting
he shall not live. but Jehu did it in subtilty to the intent
that he might destroy the worshippers of Baal.
and Jehu said proclaim a solemn assembly for Baal. and they
proclaimed it.
and Jehu sent through all Israel and all the worshippers of
Baal came so that there was not a man left that came not. and
they came into the house of Baal and the house of Baal was
full from one end to another.
and he said unto him that was over the vestry bring forth
vestments for all the worshippers of Baal. and he brought them
forth vestments.
and Jehu went and Jehonadab the son of Rechab into the house
of Baal and said unto the worshippers of Baal search and
look that there be here with you none of the servants of the
lord but the worshippers of Baal only.
and when they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings
Jehu appointed fourscore men without and said if any of the
men whom I have brought into your hands escape he that
letteth him go his life shall be for the life of him.
and it came to pass as soon as he had made an end of offering
the burnt offering that Jehu said to the guard and to the
captains go in and slay them let none come forth. and they
smote them with the edge of the sword and the guard and the
captains cast them out and went to the city of the house of
Baal.
and they brought forth the images out of the house of Baal
and burned them.
and they brake down the image of Baal and brake down the
house of Baal and made it a draught house unto this day.
thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.
howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made
Israel to Sin Jehu departed not from after them to wit the
golden calves that were in Bethel and that were in Dan.
and the lord said unto Jehu because thou hast done well in
executing that which is right in mine eyes and hast done unto
the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart thy
children of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of
Israel.
but Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the lord God of
Israel with all his heart for he departed not from the sins
of Jeroboam which made Israel to Sin.
in those days the lord began to cut Israel short and Hazael
smote them in all the coasts of Israel
from Jordan eastward all the land of Gilead the Gadites and
the Reubenites and the Manassites from Aroer which is by
the river Arnon even Gilead and Bashan.
now the rest of the acts of Jehu and all that he did and all
his might are they not written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Israel?
and Jehu slept with his fathers and they buried him in
Samaria. and Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead.
and the time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was
twenty and eight years.
and when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was
dead she arose and destroyed all the seed royal.
but Jehosheba the daughter of king Joram sister of Ahaziah
took Joash the son of Ahaziah and stole him from among the
king s sons which were slain and they hid him even him and
his nurse in the bedchamber from Athaliah so that he was not
slain.
and he was with her hid in the house of the lord six years.
and Athaliah did reign over the land.
and the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the rulers over
hundreds with the captains and the guard and brought them to
him into the house of the lord and made a covenant with them
and took an oath of them in the house of the lord and shewed
them the king s son.
and he commanded them saying this is the thing that ye shall
do a third part of you that enter in on the sabbath shall
even be keepers of the watch of the king s house
and a third part shall be at the gate of Sur and a third part
at the gate behind the guard so shall ye keep the watch of
the house that it be not broken down.
and two parts of all you that go forth on the sabbath even
they shall keep the watch of the house of the lord about the
king.
and ye shall compass the king round about every man with his
weapons in his hand and he that cometh within the ranges let
him be slain and be ye with the king as he goeth out and as
he cometh in.
and the captains over the hundreds did according to all things
that Jehoiada the priest commanded and they took every man
his men that were to come in on the sabbath with them that
should go out on the sabbath and came to Jehoiada the priest.
and to the captains over hundreds did the priest give king
David s spears and shields that were in the temple of the
lord.
and the guard stood every man with his weapons in his hand
round about the king from the right corner of the temple to
the left corner of the temple along by the altar and the
temple.
and he brought forth the king s son and put the crown upon
him and gave him the testimony and they made him king and
anointed him and they clapped their hands and said God save
the king.
and when Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the
people she came to the people into the temple of the lord.
and when she looked behold the king stood by a pillar as
the manner was and the princes and the trumpeters by the
king and all the people of the land rejoiced and blew with
trumpets and Athaliah rent her clothes and cried treason
treason.
but Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of the
hundreds the officers of the host and said unto them have
her forth without the ranges and him that followeth her kill
with the sword. for the priest had said let her not be slain
in the house of the lord.
and they laid hands on her and she went by the way by the
which the horses came into the king s house and there was she
slain.
and Jehoiada made a covenant between the lord and the king and
the people that they should be the lord s people between the
king also and the people.
and all the people of the land went into the house of Baal
and brake it down his altars and his images brake they in
pieces thoroughly and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before
the altars. and the priest appointed officers over the house
of the lord.
and he took the rulers over hundreds and the captains and
the guard and all the people of the land and they brought
down the king from the house of the lord and came by the way
of the gate of the guard to the king s house. and he sat on
the throne of the kings.
and all the people of the land rejoiced and the city was in
quiet and they slew Athaliah with the sword beside the king s
house.
seven years old was Jehoash when he began to reign.
in the seventh year of Jehu Jehoash began to reign and forty
years reigned he in Jerusalem. and his mother s name was
Zibiah of Beersheba.
and Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the lord
all his days wherein Jehoiada the priest instructed him.
but the high places were not taken away the people still
sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
and Jehoash said to the priests all the money of the
dedicated things that is brought into the house of the lord
even the money of every one that passeth the account the
money that every man is set at and all the money that cometh
into any man s heart to bring into the house of the lord
let the priests take it to them every man of his
acquaintance and let them repair the breaches of the house
wheresoever any breach shall be found.
but it was so that in the three and twentieth year of king
Jehoash the priests had not repaired the breaches of the
house.
then king Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest and the
other priests and said unto them why repair ye not the
breaches of the house? now therefore receive no more money of
your acquaintance but deliver it for the breaches of the
house.
and the priests consented to receive no more money of the
people Neither to repair the breaches of the house.
but Jehoiada the priest took a chest and bored a hole in the
lid of it and set it beside the altar on the right side as
one cometh into the house of the lord and the priests that
kept the door put therein all the money that was brought into
the house of the lord.
and it was so when they saw that there was Much money in the
chest that the king s scribe and the high priest came up and
they put up in bags and told the money that was found in the
house of the lord.
and they gave the money being told into the hands of them
that did the work that had the oversight of the house of the
lord and they laid it out to the carpenters and builders
that wrought upon the house of the lord
and to masons and hewers of stone and to buy timber and
hewed stone to repair the breaches of the house of the lord
and for all that was laid out for the house to repair it.
howbeit there were not made for the house of the lord bowls of
Silver snuffers basons trumpets any vessels of gold or
vessels of Silver of the money that was brought into the
house of the lord
but they gave that to the workmen and repaired therewith the
house of the lord.
moreover they reckoned not with the men into whose hand they
delivered the money to be bestowed on workmen for they dealt
faithfully.
the trespass money and Sin money was not brought into the
house of the lord it was the priests .
then Hazael king of Syria went up and fought against Gath
and took it and Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem.
and Jehoash king of Judah took all the hallowed things that
Jehoshaphat and Jehoram and Ahaziah his fathers kings of
Judah had dedicated and his own hallowed things and all the
gold that was found in the treasures of the house of the lord
and in the king s house and sent it to Hazael king of Syria
and he went away from Jerusalem.
and the rest of the acts of Joash and all that he did are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah?
and his servants arose and made a conspiracy and slew Joash
in the house of Millo which goeth down to Silla.
for Jozachar the son of Shimeath and Jehozabad the son of
Shomer his servants smote him and he died and they buried
him with his fathers in the city of David and Amaziah his son
reigned in his stead.
in the three and twentieth year of Joash the son of Ahaziah
king of Judah Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over
Israel in Samaria and reigned seventeen years.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord and
followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat which made
Israel to Sin he departed not therefrom.
and the anger of the lord was kindled against Israel and he
delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Syria and into
the hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael all their days.
and Jehoahaz besought the lord and the lord hearkened unto
him for he saw the oppression of Israel because the king of
Syria oppressed them.
 and the lord gave Israel a saviour so that they went out
from under the hand of the Syrians and the children of Israel
dwelt in their tents as beforetime.
nevertheless they departed not from the sins of the house of
Jeroboam who made Israel Sin but walked therein and there
remained the grove also in Samaria.
Neither did he leave of the people to Jehoahaz but fifty
horsemen and Ten chariots and Ten thousand footmen for the
king of Syria had destroyed them and had made them like the
dust by threshing.
now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz and all that he did and
his might are they not written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Israel?
and Jehoahaz slept with his fathers and they buried him in
Samaria and Joash his son reigned in his stead.
in the thirty and seventh year of Joash king of Judah began
Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to reign over Israel in Samaria
and reigned sixteen years.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord he
departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat
who made Israel Sin but he walked therein.
and the rest of the acts of Joash and all that he did and
his might wherewith he fought against Amaziah king of Judah
are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel?
and Joash slept with his fathers and Jeroboam sat upon his
throne and Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of
Israel.
now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died.
and Joash the king of Israel came down unto him and wept over
his face and said O my father my father the chariot of
Israel and the horsemen thereof.
and Elisha said unto him take bow and arrows. and he took
unto him bow and arrows.
and he said to the king of Israel put thine hand upon the
bow. and he put his hand upon it and Elisha put his hands
upon the king s hands.
and he said open the window eastward. and he opened it. then
Elisha said shoot. and he shot. and he said the arrow of the
lord s deliverance and the arrow of deliverance from Syria
for thou shalt smite the Syrians in Aphek till thou have
consumed them.
and he said take the arrows. and he took them. and he said
unto the king of Israel smite upon the ground. and he smote
thrice and stayed.
and the man of God was wroth with him and said thou
shouldest have smitten five or six times then hadst thou
smitten Syria till thou hadst consumed it whereas now thou
shalt smite Syria but thrice.
and Elisha died and they buried him. and the Bands of the
Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year.
and it came to pass as they were burying a man that behold
they spied a band of men and they cast the man into the
sepulchre of Elisha and when the man was let down and
touched the bones of Elisha he revived and stood up on his
feet.
but Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of
Jehoahaz.
and the lord was gracious unto them and had compassion on
them and had respect unto them because of his covenant with
Abraham Isaac and Jacob and would not destroy them Neither
cast he them from his presence as yet.
so Hazael king of Syria died and Benhadad his son reigned in
his stead.
and Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again out of the hand of
Benhadad the son of Hazael the cities which he had taken out
of the hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. three times did
Joash beat him and recovered the cities of Israel.
in the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel
reigned Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah.
he was twenty and five years old when he began to reign and
reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. and his mother s
name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.
and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord yet
not like David his father he did according to all things as
Joash his father did.
howbeit the high places were not taken away as yet the people
did sacrifice and burnt incense on the high places.
and it came to pass as soon as the kingdom was confirmed in
his hand that he slew his servants which had slain the king
his father.
but the children of the murderers he slew not according unto
that which is written in the book of the law of Moses wherein
the lord commanded saying the fathers shall not be put to
death for the children nor the children be put to death for
the fathers but every man shall be put to death for his own
Sin.
he slew of Edom in the valley of salt Ten thousand and took
Selah by war and called the name of it Joktheel unto this
day.
then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz
son of Jehu king of Israel saying come let us look one
another in the face.
and Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah
saying the thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that
was in Lebanon saying give thy daughter to my son to wife
and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon and
trode down the thistle.
thou hast indeed smitten Edom and thine heart hath lifted
thee up glory of this and tarry at home for why shouldest
thou meddle to thy hurt that thou shouldest fall even thou
and Judah with thee?
but Amaziah would not hear. therefore Jehoash king of Israel
went up and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another
in the face at Bethshemesh which belongeth to Judah.
and Judah was put to the worse before Israel and they fled
every man to their tents.
and Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah the son
of Jehoash the son of Ahaziah at Bethshemesh and came to
Jerusalem and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate
of Ephraim unto the corner gate four hundred cubits.
and he took all the gold and Silver and all the vessels that
were found in the house of the lord and in the treasures of
the king s house and hostages and returned to Samaria.
now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did and his
might and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Israel?
and Jehoash slept with his fathers and was buried in Samaria
with the kings of Israel and Jeroboam his son reigned in his
stead.
and Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the
death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.
and the rest of the acts of Amaziah are they not written in
the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
now they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem and he
fled to Lachish but they sent after him to Lachish and slew
him there.
and they brought him on horses and he was buried at Jerusalem
with his fathers in the city of David.
and all the people of Judah took Azariah which was sixteen
years old and made him king instead of his father Amaziah.
he built Elath and restored it to Judah after that the king
slept with his fathers.
in the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of
Judah Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign
in Samaria and reigned forty and one years.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord he
departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat
who made Israel to Sin.
he restored the coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath
unto the sea of the plain according to the word of the lord
God of Israel which he spake by the hand of his servant
Jonah the son of Amittai the prophet which was of
Gathhepher.
for the lord saw the affliction of Israel that it was very
bitter for there was not any shut up nor any left nor any
helper for Israel.
and the lord said not that he would blot out the name of
Israel from under heaven but he saved them by the hand of
Jeroboam the son of Joash.
now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam and all that he did and
his might how he warred and how he recovered Damascus and
Hamath which belonged to Judah for Israel are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
and Jeroboam slept with his fathers even with the kings of
Israel and Zachariah his son reigned in his stead.
in the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel
began Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah to reign.
sixteen years old was he when he began to reign and he
reigned two and fifty years in Jerusalem. and his mother s
name was Jecholiah of Jerusalem.
and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord
according to all that his father Amaziah had done
save that the high places were not removed the people
sacrificed and burnt incense still on the high places.
and the lord smote the king so that he was a leper unto the
day of his death and dwelt in a several house. and Jotham the
king s son was over the house judging the people of the land.
and the rest of the acts of Azariah and all that he did are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah?
so Azariah slept with his fathers and they buried him with
his fathers in the city of David and Jotham his son reigned
in his stead.
in the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah did
Zachariah the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria six
months.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord as
his fathers had done he departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to Sin.
and Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him and smote
him before the people and slew him and reigned in his stead.
and the rest of the acts of Zachariah behold they are
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
this was the word of the lord which he spake unto Jehu
saying thy sons shall sit on the throne of Israel unto the
fourth generation. and so it came to pass.
Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the nine and
thirtieth year of Uzziah king of Judah and he reigned a full
month in Samaria.
for Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah and came to
Samaria and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria and
slew him and reigned in his stead.
and the rest of the acts of Shallum and his conspiracy which
he made behold they are written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel.
then Menahem smote Tiphsah and all that were therein and the
coasts thereof from Tirzah because they opened not to him
therefore he smote it and all the women therein that were
with child he ripped up.
in the nine and thirtieth year of Azariah king of Judah began
Menahem the son of Gadi to reign over Israel and reigned Ten
years in Samaria.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord he
departed not all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat who made Israel to Sin.
and Pul the king of Assyria came against the land and Menahem
gave Pul a thousand talents of Silver that his hand might be
with him to confirm the kingdom in his hand.
and Menahem exacted the money of Israel even of all the
Mighty men of wealth of each man fifty shekels of Silver to
give to the king of Assyria. so the king of Assyria turned
back and stayed not there in the land.
and the rest of the acts of Menahem and all that he did are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Israel?
and Menahem slept with his fathers and Pekahiah his son
reigned in his stead.
in the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekahiah the son
of Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria and reigned
two years.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who
made Israel to Sin.
but Pekah the son of Remaliah a captain of his conspired
against him and smote him in Samaria in the palace of the
king s house with Argob and Arieh and with him fifty men of
the Gileadites and he killed him and reigned in his room.
and the rest of the acts of Pekahiah and all that he did
behold they are written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel.
in the two and fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekah
the son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria and
reigned twenty years.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who
made Israel to Sin.
in the days of Pekah king of Israel came Tiglathpileser king
of Assyria and took Ijon and Abelbethmaachah and Janoah
and Kedesh and Hazor and Gilead and Galilee all the land
of Naphtali and carried them captive to Assyria.
and Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the
son of Remaliah and smote him and slew him and reigned in
his stead in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah.
and the rest of the acts of Pekah and all that he did
behold they are written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel.
in the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel
began Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah to reign.
five and twenty years old was he when he began to reign and
he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. and his mother s name
was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok.
and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord he
did according to all that his father Uzziah had done.
howbeit the high places were not removed the people
sacrificed and burned incense still in the high places. he
built the higher gate of the house of the lord.
now the rest of the acts of Jotham and all that he did are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah?
in those days the lord began to send against Judah Rezin the
king of Syria and Pekah the son of Remaliah.
and Jotham slept with his fathers and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David his father and Ahaz his son
reigned in his stead.
in the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah Ahaz the
son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign.
twenty years old was Ahaz when he began to reign and reigned
sixteen years in Jerusalem and did not that which was right
in the sight of the lord his God like David his father.
but he walked in the way of the kings of Israel yea and made
his son to pass through the fire according to the
abominations of the heathen whom the lord cast out from
before the children of Israel.
and he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places and on
the hills and under every green tree.
then Rezin king of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah king of
Israel came up to Jerusalem to war and they besieged Ahaz
but could not overcome him.
at that time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath to Syria and
drave the Jews from Elath and the Syrians came to Elath and
dwelt there unto this day.
so Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglathpileser king of Assyria
saying I Am thy servant and thy son come up and save me out
of the hand of the king of Syria and out of the hand of the
king of Israel which rise up against me.
and Ahaz took the Silver and gold that was found in the house
of the lord and in the treasures of the king s house and
sent it for a present to the king of Assyria.
and the king of Assyria hearkened unto him for the king of
Assyria went up against Damascus and took it and carried the
people of it captive to Kir and slew Rezin.
and king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglathpileser king of
Assyria and saw an altar that was at Damascus and king Ahaz
sent to Urijah the priest the fashion of the altar and the
pattern of it according to all the workmanship thereof.
and Urijah the priest built an altar according to all that
king Ahaz had sent from Damascus so Urijah the priest made it
against king Ahaz came from Damascus.
and when the king was come from Damascus the king saw the
altar and the king approached to the altar and offered
thereon.
and he burnt his burnt offering and his meat offering and
poured his drink offering and sprinkled the blood of his
peace offerings upon the altar.
and he brought also the brasen altar which was before the
lord from the forefront of the house from between the altar
and the house of the lord and put it on the north side of the
altar.
and king Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest saying upon the
great altar burn the morning burnt offering and the evening
meat offering and the king s burnt sacrifice and his meat
offering with the burnt offering of all the people of the
land and their meat offering and their drink offerings and
sprinkle upon it all the blood of the burnt offering and all
the blood of the sacrifice and the brasen altar shall be for
me to enquire by.
thus did Urijah the priest according to all that king Ahaz
commanded.
and king Ahaz cut off the borders of the bases and removed
the laver from off them and took down the sea from off the
brasen oxen that were under it and put it upon the pavement
of stones.
and the covert for the sabbath that they had built in the
house and the king s entry without turned he from the house
of the lord for the king of Assyria.
now the rest of the acts of Ahaz which he did are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
and Ahaz slept with his fathers and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David and Hezekiah his son reigned in
his stead.
in the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah began Hoshea the son
of Elah to reign in Samaria over Israel nine years.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord but
not as the kings of Israel that were before him.
against him came up Shalmaneser king of Assyria and Hoshea
became his servant and gave him presents.
and the king of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea for he had
sent messengers to so king of Egypt and brought no present to
the king of Assyria as he had done year by year therefore
the king of Assyria shut him up and bound him in prison.
then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land and
went up to Samaria and besieged it three years.
in the ninth year of Hoshea the king of Assyria took Samaria
and carried Israel away into Assyria and placed them in Halah
and in Habor by the river of Gozan and in the cities of the
Medes.
for so it was that the children of Israel had sinned against
the lord their God which had brought them up out of the land
of Egypt from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt and
had feared other gods
and walked in the statutes of the heathen whom the lord cast
out from before the children of Israel and of the kings of
Israel which they had made.
and the children of Israel did secretly those things that were
not right against the lord their God and they built them high
places in all their cities from the tower of the watchmen to
the fenced city.
and they set them up images and groves in every high hill and
under every green tree
and there they burnt incense in all the high places as did
the heathen whom the lord carried away before them and
wrought wicked things to provoke the lord to anger
for they served idols whereof the lord had said unto them ye
shall not do this thing.
yet the lord testified against Israel and against Judah by
all the prophets and by all the seers saying turn ye from
your evil ways and keep my commandments and my statutes
according to all the law which I commanded your fathers and
which I sent to you by my servants the prophets.
notwithstanding they would not hear but hardened their necks
like to the neck of their fathers that did not believe in the
lord their God.
and they rejected his statutes and his covenant that he made
with their fathers and his testimonies which he testified
against them and they followed vanity and became vain and
went after the heathen that were round about them concerning
whom the lord had charged them that they should not do like
them.
and they left all the commandments of the lord their God and
made them molten images even two calves and made a grove
and worshipped all the host of heaven and served Baal.
and they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through
the fire and used divination and enchantments and sold
themselves to do evil in the sight of the lord to provoke him
to anger.
therefore the lord was very angry with Israel and removed
them out of his sight there was none left but the tribe of
Judah only.
also Judah kept not the commandments of the lord their God
but walked in the statutes of Israel which they made.
and the lord rejected all the seed of Israel and afflicted
them and delivered them into the hand of spoilers until he
had cast them out of his sight.
for he rent Israel from the house of David and they made
Jeroboam the son of Nebat king and Jeroboam drave Israel from
following the lord and made them Sin a great Sin.
for the children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam
which he did they departed not from them
until the lord removed Israel out of his sight as he had said
by all his servants the prophets. so was Israel carried away
out of their own land to Assyria unto this day.
and the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon and from
Cuthah and from Ava and from Hamath and from Sepharvaim
and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the
children of Israel and they possessed Samaria and dwelt in
the cities thereof.
and so it was at the beginning of their dwelling there that
they feared not the lord therefore the lord sent lions among
them which slew some of them.
wherefore they spake to the king of Assyria saying the
nations which thou hast removed and placed in the cities of
Samaria know not the manner of the God of the land therefore
he hath sent lions among them and behold they slay them
because they know not the manner of the God of the land.
then the king of Assyria commanded saying carry thither one
of the priests whom ye brought from thence and let them go
and dwell there and let him teach them the manner of the God
of the land.
then one of the priests whom they had carried away from
Samaria came and dwelt in Bethel and taught them how they
should fear the lord.
howbeit every nation made gods of their own and put them in
the houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made
every nation in their cities wherein they dwelt.
and the men of Babylon made Succothbenoth and the men of Cuth
made Nergal and the men of Hamath made Ashima
and the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak and the Sepharvites
burnt their children in fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech
the gods of Sepharvaim.
so they feared the lord and made unto themselves of the
lowest of them priests of the high places which sacrificed
for them in the houses of the high places.
they feared the lord and served their own gods after the
manner of the nations whom they carried away from thence.
unto this day they do after the former manners they fear not
the lord Neither do they after their statutes or after their
ordinances or after the law and commandment which the lord
commanded the children of Jacob whom he named Israel
with whom the lord had made a covenant and charged them
saying ye shall not fear other gods nor bow yourselves to
them nor serve them nor sacrifice to them
but the lord who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with
great power and a stretched out arm him shall ye fear and
him shall ye worship and to him shall ye do sacrifice.
and the statutes and the ordinances and the law and the
commandment which he wrote for you ye shall observe to do
for evermore and ye shall not fear other gods.
and the covenant that I have made with you ye shall not
forget Neither shall ye fear other gods.
but the lord your God ye shall fear and he shall deliver you
out of the hand of all your enemies.
howbeit they did not hearken but they did after their former
manner.
so these nations feared the lord and served their graven
images both their children and their children s children as
did their fathers so do they unto this day.
now it came to pass in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah
king of Israel that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah
began to reign.
twenty and five years old was he when he began to reign and
he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. his mother s
name also was Abi the daughter of Zachariah.
and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord
according to all that David his father did.
he removed the high places and brake the images and cut down
the groves and brake in pieces the brasen serpent that Moses
had made for unto those days the children of Israel did burn
incense to it and he called it Nehushtan.
he trusted in the lord God of Israel so that after him was
none like him among all the kings of Judah nor any that were
before him.
for he clave to the lord and departed not from following him
but kept his commandments which the lord commanded Moses.
and the lord was with him and he prospered whithersoever he
went forth and he rebelled against the king of Assyria and
served him not.
he smote the Philistines even unto Gaza and the borders
thereof from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.
and it came to pass in the fourth year of king Hezekiah which
was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel
that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria and
besieged it.
and at the end of three years they took it even in the sixth
year of Hezekiah that is in the ninth year of Hoshea king of
Israel Samaria was taken.
and the king of Assyria did carry away Israel unto Assyria
and put them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan and
in the cities of the Medes
because they obeyed not the voice of the lord their God but
transgressed his covenant and all that Moses the servant of
the lord commanded and would not hear them nor do them.
now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah did Sennacherib
king of Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of
Judah and took them.
and Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to
Lachish saying I have offended return from me that which
thou puttest on me will I bear. and the king of Assyria
appointed unto Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of
Silver and thirty talents of gold.
and Hezekiah gave him all the Silver that was found in the
house of the lord and in the treasures of the king s house.
at that time did Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of
the temple of the lord and from the pillars which Hezekiah
king of Judah had overlaid and gave it to the king of
Assyria.
and the king of Assyria sent Tartan and Rabsaris and Rabshakeh
from Lachish to king Hezekiah with a great host against
Jerusalem. and they went up and came to Jerusalem. and when
they were come up they came and stood by the conduit of the
upper pool which is in the highway of the fuller s field.
and when they had called to the king there came out to them
Eliakim the son of Hilkiah which was over the household and
Shebna the scribe and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder.
and Rabshakeh said unto them speak ye now to Hezekiah thus
saith the great king the king of Assyria what confidence is
this wherein thou trustest?
thou sayest but they are but vain words I have counsel and
strength for the war. now on whom dost thou trust that thou
rebellest against me?
now behold thou trustest upon the staff of this bruised
reed even upon Egypt on which if a man lean it will go into
his hand and pierce it so is Pharaoh king of Egypt unto all
that trust on him.
but if ye say unto me we trust in the lord our God is not
that he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath
taken away and hath said to Judah and Jerusalem ye shall
worship before this altar in Jerusalem?
now therefore I pray thee give pledges to my lord the king
of Assyria and I will deliver thee two thousand horses if
thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.
how then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the
least of my Master s servants and put thy trust on Egypt for
chariots and for horsemen?
Am I now come up without the lord against this place to
destroy it? the lord said to me go up against this land and
destroy it.
then said Eliakim the son of Hilkiah and Shebna and Joah
unto Rabshakeh speak I pray thee to thy servants in the
Syrian language for we understand it and talk not with us in
the Jews language in the ears of the people that are on the
wall.
but Rabshakeh said unto them hath my Master sent me to thy
Master and to thee to speak these words? hath he not sent me
to the men which sit on the wall that they may eat their own
dung and drink their own piss with you?
then Rabshakeh stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jews
language and spake saying hear the word of the great king
the king of Assyria
thus saith the king let not Hezekiah deceive you for he
shall not be able to deliver you out of his hand
Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the lord saying the
lord will surely deliver us and this city shall not be
delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.
hearken not to Hezekiah for thus saith the king of Assyria
make an agreement with me by a present and come out to me
and then eat ye every man of his own vine and every one of
his fig tree and drink ye every one the waters of his
cistern
until I come and take you away to a land like your own land a
land of corn and wine a land of bread and vineyards a land
of oil olive and of honey that ye may live and not die and
hearken not unto Hezekiah when he persuadeth you saying the
lord will deliver us.
hath any of the gods of the nations delivered at all his land
out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
where are the gods of Hamath and of Arpad? where are the gods
of Sepharvaim Hena and Ivah? have they delivered Samaria out
of mine hand?
who are they among all the gods of the countries that have
delivered their country out of mine hand that the lord should
deliver Jerusalem out of mine hand?
but the people held their peace and answered him not a word
for the king s commandment was saying answer him not.
then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah which was over the
household and Shebna the scribe and Joah the son of Asaph
the recorder to Hezekiah with their clothes rent and told
him the words of Rabshakeh.
and it came to pass when king Hezekiah heard it that he rent
his clothes and covered himself with sackcloth and went into
the house of the lord.
and he sent Eliakim which was over the household and Shebna
the scribe and the elders of the priests covered with
sackcloth to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.
and they said unto him thus saith Hezekiah this day is a day
of trouble and of rebuke and blasphemy for the children are
come to the birth and there is not strength to bring forth.
it may be the lord thy God will hear all the words of
Rabshakeh whom the king of Assyria his Master hath sent to
reproach the living God and will reprove the words which the
lord thy God hath heard wherefore lift up thy prayer for the
remnant that are left.
so the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
and Isaiah said unto them thus shall ye say to your Master
thus saith the lord be not afraid of the words which thou
hast heard with which the servants of the king of Assyria
have blasphemed me.
behold I will send a blast upon him and he shall hear a
rumour and shall return to his own land and I will cause him
to fall by the sword in his own land.
so Rabshakeh returned and found the king of Assyria warring
against Libnah for he had heard that he was departed from
Lachish.
and when he heard say of Tirhakah king of Ethiopia behold he
is come out to fight against thee he sent messengers again
unto Hezekiah saying
thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah saying let not
thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee saying Jerusalem
shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.
behold thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to
all lands by destroying them utterly and shalt thou be
delivered?
have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers
have destroyed as Gozan and Haran and Rezeph and the
children of Eden which were in Thelasar?
where is the king of Hamath and the king of Arpad and the
king of the city of Sepharvaim of Hena and Ivah?
and Hezekiah received the letter of the hand of the
messengers and read it and Hezekiah went up into the house
of the lord and spread it before the lord.
and Hezekiah prayed before the lord and said O lord God of
Israel which dwellest between the Cherubims thou art the
God even thou alone of all the kingdoms of the earth thou
hast made heaven and earth.
lord bow down thine ear and hear open lord thine eyes
and see and hear the words of Sennacherib which hath sent
him to reproach the living God.
of a truth lord the kings of Assyria have destroyed the
nations and their lands
and have cast their gods into the fire for they were no gods
but the work of men s hands wood and stone therefore they
have destroyed them.
now therefore O lord our God I beseech thee save thou us
out of his hand that all the kingdoms of the earth may know
that thou art the lord God even thou only.
then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah saying thus
saith the lord God of Israel that which thou hast prayed to
me against Sennacherib king of Assyria I have heard.
this is the word that the lord hath spoken concerning him the
virgin the daughter of Zion hath despised thee and laughed
thee to scorn the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head
at thee.
whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom
hast thou exalted thy voice and lifted up thine eyes on high?
even against the holy one of Israel.
by thy messengers thou hast reproached the lord and hast
said with the multitude of my chariots I Am come up to the
height of the mountains to the sides of Lebanon and will cut
down the tall cedar trees thereof and the choice fir trees
thereof and I will enter into the lodgings of his borders
and into the forest of his Carmel.
I have digged and drunk strange waters and with the sole of
my feet have I dried up all the rivers of besieged places.
hast thou not heard long ago how I have done it and of
ancient times that I have formed it? now have I brought it to
pass that thou shouldest be to lay waste fenced cities into
ruinous heaps.
therefore their inhabitants were of small power they were
dismayed and confounded they were as the grass of the field
and as the green herb as the grass on the house tops and as
corn blasted before it be grown up.
but I know thy abode and thy going out and thy coming in
and thy rage against me.
because thy rage against me and thy tumult is come up into
mine ears therefore I will put my hook in thy nose and my
bridle in thy lips and I will turn thee back by the way by
which thou camest.
and this shall be a sign unto thee ye shall eat this year
such things as grow of themselves and in the second year that
which springeth of the same and in the third year sow ye and
reap and plant vineyards and eat the fruits thereof.
and the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall
yet again take root downward and bear fruit upward.
for out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant and they that
escape out of mount Zion the zeal of the lord of hosts shall
do this.
therefore thus saith the lord concerning the king of Assyria
he shall not come into this city nor shoot an arrow there
nor come before it with shield nor cast a bank against it.
by the way that he came by the same shall he return and
shall not come into this city saith the lord.
for I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake
and for my servant David s sake.
and it came to pass that night that the angel of the lord
went out and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred
fourscore and five thousand and when they arose early in the
morning behold they were all dead corpses.
so Sennacherib king of Assyria departed and went and
returned and dwelt at Nineveh.
and it came to pass as he was worshipping in the house of
Nisroch his God that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote
him with the sword and they escaped into the land of Armenia.
and Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.
in those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. and the prophet
Isaiah the son of Amoz came to him and said unto him thus
saith the lord set thine house in order for thou shalt die
and not live.
then he turned his face to the wall and prayed unto the lord
saying
I beseech thee O lord remember now how I have walked before
thee in truth and with a perfect heart and have done that
which is good in thy sight. and Hezekiah wept sore.
and it came to pass afore Isaiah was gone out into the middle
court that the word of the lord came to him saying
turn again and tell Hezekiah the captain of my people thus
saith the lord the God of David thy father I have heard thy
prayer I have seen thy tears behold I will heal thee on
the third day thou shalt go up unto the house of the lord.
and I will add unto thy days fifteen years and I will deliver
thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria and
I will defend this city for mine own sake and for my servant
David s sake.
and Isaiah said take a lump of figs. and they took and laid
it on the boil and he recovered.
and Hezekiah said unto Isaiah what shall be the sign that the
lord will heal me and that I shall go up into the house of
the lord the third day?
and Isaiah said this sign shalt thou have of the lord that
the lord will do the thing that he hath spoken shall the
shadow go forward Ten degrees or go back Ten degrees?
and Hezekiah answered it is a light thing for the shadow to
go down Ten degrees nay but let the shadow return backward
Ten degrees.
and Isaiah the prophet cried unto the lord and he brought the
shadow Ten degrees backward by which it had gone down in the
dial of Ahaz.
at that time Berodachbaladan the son of Baladan king of
Babylon sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah for he had
heard that Hezekiah had been sick.
and Hezekiah hearkened unto them and shewed them all the
house of his precious things the Silver and the gold and
the spices and the precious ointment and all the house of
his armour and all that was found in his treasures there was
nothing in his house nor in all his dominion that Hezekiah
shewed them not.
then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah and said unto
him what said these men? and from whence came they unto thee?
and Hezekiah said they are come from a far country even from
Babylon.
and he said what have they seen in thine house? and Hezekiah
answered all the things that are in mine house have they
seen there is nothing among my treasures that I have not
shewed them.
and Isaiah said unto Hezekiah hear the word of the lord.
behold the days come that all that is in thine house and
that which thy fathers have laid up in store unto this day
shall be carried into Babylon nothing shall be left saith
the lord.
and of thy sons that shall issue from thee which thou shalt
beget shall they take away and they shall be eunuchs in the
palace of the king of Babylon.
then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah good is the word of the lord
which thou hast spoken. and he said is it not good if peace
and truth be in my days?
and the rest of the acts of Hezekiah and all his might and
how he made a pool and a conduit and brought water into the
city are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Judah?
and Hezekiah slept with his fathers and Manasseh his son
reigned in his stead.
Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign and
reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem. and his mother s
name was Hephzibah.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord after
the abominations of the heathen whom the lord cast out before
the children of Israel.
for he built up again the high places which Hezekiah his
father had destroyed and he reared up altars for Baal and
made a grove as did Ahab king of Israel and worshipped all
the host of heaven and served them.
and he built altars in the house of the lord of which the
lord said in Jerusalem will I put my name.
and he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two
courts of the house of the lord.
and he made his son pass through the fire and observed times
and used enchantments and dealt with familiar spirits and
wizards he wrought Much wickedness in the sight of the lord
to provoke him to anger.
and he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the
house of which the lord said to David and to Solomon his
son in this house and in Jerusalem which I have chosen out
of all tribes of Israel will I put my name for ever
Neither will I make the feet of Israel move any more out of
the land which I gave their fathers only if they will observe
to do according to all that I have commanded them and
according to all the law that my servant Moses commanded them.
but they hearkened not and Manasseh seduced them to do more
evil than did the nations whom the lord destroyed before the
children of Israel.
and the lord spake by his servants the prophets saying
because Manasseh king of Judah hath done these abominations
and hath done wickedly above all that the Amorites did which
were before him and hath made Judah also to Sin with his
idols
therefore thus saith the lord God of Israel behold I Am
bringing such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah that whosoever
heareth of it both his ears shall tingle.
and I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria and the
plummet of the house of Ahab and I will wipe Jerusalem as a
man wipeth a dish wiping it and turning it upside down.
and I will forsake the remnant of mine inheritance and
deliver them into the hand of their enemies and they shall
become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies
because they have done that which was evil in my sight and
have provoked me to anger since the day their fathers came
forth out of Egypt even unto this day.
moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very Much till he had
filled Jerusalem from one end to another beside his Sin
wherewith he made Judah to Sin in doing that which was evil
in the sight of the lord.
now the rest of the acts of Manasseh and all that he did and
his Sin that he sinned are they not written in the book of
the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
and Manasseh slept with his fathers and was buried in the
garden of his own house in the garden of Uzza and Amon his
son reigned in his stead.
Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign and
he reigned two years in Jerusalem. and his mother s name was
Meshullemeth the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord as
his father Manasseh did.
and he walked in all the way that his father walked in and
served the idols that his father served and worshipped them
and he forsook the lord God of his fathers and walked not in
the way of the lord.
and the servants of Amon conspired against him and slew the
king in his own house.
and the people of the land slew all them that had conspired
against king Amon and the people of the land made Josiah his
son king in his stead.
now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
and he was buried in his sepulchre in the garden of Uzza and
Josiah his son reigned in his stead.
Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign and he
reigned thirty and one years in Jerusalem. and his mother s
name was Jedidah the daughter of Adaiah of Boscath.
and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord and
walked in all the way of David his father and turned not
aside to the right hand or to the left.
and it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king Josiah
that the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah the son of
Meshullam the scribe to the house of the lord saying
go up to Hilkiah the high priest that he may sum the Silver
which is brought into the house of the lord which the keepers
of the door have gathered of the people
and let them deliver it into the hand of the doers of the
work that have the oversight of the house of the lord and
let them give it to the doers of the work which is in the
house of the lord to repair the breaches of the house
unto carpenters and builders and masons and to buy timber
and hewn stone to repair the house.
howbeit there was no reckoning made with them of the money
that was delivered into their hand because they dealt
faithfully.
and Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe I
have found the book of the law in the house of the lord. and
Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan and he read it.
and Shaphan the scribe came to the king and brought the king
word again and said thy servants have gathered the money
that was found in the house and have delivered it into the
hand of them that do the work that have the oversight of the
house of the lord.
and Shaphan the scribe shewed the king saying Hilkiah the
priest hath delivered me a book. and Shaphan read it before
the king.
and it came to pass when the king had heard the words of the
book of the law that he rent his clothes.
and the king commanded Hilkiah the priest and Ahikam the son
of Shaphan and Achbor the son of Michaiah and Shaphan the
scribe and Asahiah a servant of the king s saying
go ye enquire of the lord for me and for the people and for
all Judah concerning the words of this book that is found
for great is the wrath of the lord that is kindled against us
because our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this
book to do according unto all that which is written
concerning us.
so Hilkiah the priest and Ahikam and Achbor and Shaphan
and Asahiah went unto Huldah the prophetess the wife of
Shallum the son of Tikvah the son of Harhas keeper of the
wardrobe now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college and
they communed with her.
and she said unto them thus saith the lord God of Israel
tell the man that sent you to me
thus saith the lord behold I will bring evil upon this
place and upon the inhabitants thereof even all the words of
the book which the king of Judah hath read
because they have forsaken me and have burned incense unto
other gods that they might provoke me to anger with all the
works of their hands therefore my wrath shall be kindled
against this place and shall not be quenched.
but to the king of Judah which sent you to enquire of the
lord thus shall ye say to him thus saith the lord God of
Israel as touching the words which thou hast heard
because thine heart was tender and thou hast humbled thyself
before the lord when thou heardest what I spake against this
place and against the inhabitants thereof that they should
become a desolation and a curse and hast rent thy clothes
and wept before me I also have heard thee saith the lord.
behold therefore I will gather thee unto thy fathers and
thou shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace and thine eyes
shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place.
and they brought the king word again.
and the king sent and they gathered unto him all the elders
of Judah and of Jerusalem.
and the king went up into the house of the lord and all the
men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him
and the priests and the prophets and all the people both
small and great and he read in their ears all the words of
the book of the covenant which was found in the house of the
lord.
and the king stood by a pillar and made a covenant before the
lord to walk after the lord and to keep his commandments and
his testimonies and his statutes with all their heart and all
their soul to perform the words of this covenant that were
written in this book. and all the people stood to the
covenant.
and the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest and the
priests of the second order and the keepers of the door to
bring forth out of the temple of the lord all the vessels that
were made for Baal and for the grove and for all the host of
heaven and he burned them without Jerusalem in the fields of
Kidron and carried the ashes of them unto Bethel.
and he put down the idolatrous priests whom the kings of
Judah had ordained to burn incense in the high places in the
cities of Judah and in the places round about Jerusalem them
also that burned incense unto Baal to the sun and to the
moon and to the planets and to all the host of heaven.
and he brought out the grove from the house of the lord
without Jerusalem unto the brook Kidron and burned it at the
brook Kidron and stamped it small to powder and cast the
powder thereof upon the graves of the children of the people.
and he brake down the houses of the sodomites that were by
the house of the lord where the women wove hangings for the
grove.
and he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah and
defiled the high places where the priests had burned incense
from Geba to Beersheba and brake down the high places of the
gates that were in the entering in of the gate of Joshua the
Governor of the city which were on a man s left hand at the
gate of the city.
nevertheless the priests of the high places came not up to the
altar of the lord in Jerusalem but they did eat of the
unleavened bread among their brethren.
and he defiled Topheth which is in the valley of the children
of Hinnom that no man might make his son or his daughter to
pass through the fire to Molech.
and he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given
to the sun at the entering in of the house of the lord by
the chamber of Nathanmelech the chamberlain which was in the
suburbs and burned the chariots of the sun with fire.
and the altars that were on the top of the upper chamber of
Ahaz which the kings of Judah had made and the altars which
Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of the lord
did the king beat down and brake them down from thence and
cast the dust of them into the brook Kidron.
and the high places that were before Jerusalem which were on
the right hand of the mount of corruption which Solomon the
king of Israel had builded for Ashtoreth the abomination of
the Zidonians and for Chemosh the abomination of the
Moabites and for Milcom the abomination of the children of
Ammon did the king defile.
and he brake in pieces the images and cut down the groves
and filled their places with the bones of men.
moreover the altar that was at Bethel and the high place
which Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to Sin had
made both that altar and the high place he brake down and
burned the high place and stamped it small to powder and
burned the grove.
and as Josiah turned himself he spied the sepulchres that
were there in the mount and sent and took the bones out of
the sepulchres and burned them upon the altar and polluted
it according to the word of the lord which the man of God
proclaimed who proclaimed these words.
then he said what title is that that I see? and the men of
the city told him it is the sepulchre of the man of God
which came from Judah and proclaimed these things that thou
hast done against the altar of Bethel.
and he said let him alone let no man move his bones. so they
let his bones alone with the bones of the prophet that came
out of Samaria.
and all the houses also of the high places that were in the
cities of Samaria which the kings of Israel had made to
provoke the lord to anger Josiah took away and did to them
according to all the acts that he had done in Bethel.
and he slew all the priests of the high places that were there
upon the altars and burned men s bones upon them and
returned to Jerusalem.
and the king commanded all the people saying keep the
passover unto the lord your God as it is written in the book
of this covenant.
surely there was not holden such a passover from the days of
the judges that judged Israel nor in all the days of the
kings of Israel nor of the kings of Judah
but in the eighteenth year of king Josiah wherein this
passover was holden to the lord in Jerusalem.
moreover the workers with familiar spirits and the wizards
and the images and the idols and all the abominations that
were spied in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem did Josiah
put away that he might perform the words of the law which
were written in the book that Hilkiah the priest found in the
house of the lord.
and like unto him was there no king before him that turned to
the lord with all his heart and with all his soul and with
all his might according to all the law of Moses Neither
after him arose there any like him.
notwithstanding the lord turned not from the fierceness of his
great wrath wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah
because of all the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him
withal.
and the lord said I will remove Judah also out of my sight
as I have removed Israel and will cast off this city
Jerusalem which I have chosen and the house of which I said
my name shall be there.
now the rest of the acts of Josiah and all that he did are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah?
in his days Pharaohnechoh king of Egypt went up against the
king of Assyria to the river Euphrates and king Josiah went
against him and he slew him at Megiddo when he had seen him.
and his servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo
and brought him to Jerusalem and buried him in his own
sepulchre. and the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of
Josiah and anointed him and made him king in his father s
stead.
Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to
reign and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. and his
mother s name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord
according to all that his fathers had done.
and Pharaohnechoh put him in Bands at Riblah in the land of
Hamath that he might not reign in Jerusalem and put the land
to a tribute of an hundred talents of Silver and a talent of
gold.
and Pharaohnechoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the
room of Josiah his father and turned his name to Jehoiakim
and took Jehoahaz away and he came to Egypt and died there.
and Jehoiakim gave the Silver and the gold to Pharaoh but he
taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment
of Pharaoh he exacted the Silver and the gold of the people
of the land of every one according to his taxation to give
it unto Pharaohnechoh.
Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to
reign and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. and his
mother s name was Zebudah the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord
according to all that his fathers had done.
in his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up and
Jehoiakim became his servant three years then he turned and
rebelled against him.
and the lord sent against him Bands of the Chaldees and Bands
of the Syrians and Bands of the Moabites and Bands of the
children of Ammon and sent them against Judah to destroy it
according to the word of the lord which he spake by his
servants the prophets.
surely at the commandment of the lord came this upon Judah to
remove them out of his sight for the sins of Manasseh
according to all that he did
and also for the innocent blood that he shed for he filled
Jerusalem with innocent blood which the lord would not
pardon.
now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim and all that he did
are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Judah?
so Jehoiakim slept with his fathers and Jehoiachin his son
reigned in his stead.
and the king of Egypt came not again any more out of his land
for the king of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto
the river Euphrates all that pertained to the king of Egypt.
Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign and
he reigned in Jerusalem three months. and his mother s name
was Nehushta the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord
according to all that his father had done.
at that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
came up against Jerusalem and the city was besieged.
and Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came against the city and
his servants did besiege it.
and Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to the king of
Babylon he and his mother and his servants and his
princes and his officers and the king of Babylon took him in
the eighth year of his reign.
and he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of
the lord and the treasures of the king s house and cut in
pieces all the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel
had made in the temple of the lord as the lord had said.
and he carried away all Jerusalem and all the princes and
all the Mighty men of valour even Ten thousand captives and
all the craftsmen and smiths none remained save the poorest
sort of the people of the land.
and he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon and the king s
mother and the king s wives and his officers and the Mighty
of the land those carried he into captivity from Jerusalem to
Babylon.
and all the men of might even seven thousand and craftsmen
and smiths a thousand all that were strong and apt for war
even them the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon.
and the king of Babylon made Mattaniah his father s brother
king in his stead and changed his name to Zedekiah.
Zedekiah was twenty and one years old when he began to reign
and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. and his mother s
name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord
according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
for through the anger of the lord it came to pass in Jerusalem
and Judah until he had cast them out from his presence that
Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
and it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign in the
tenth month in the tenth day of the month that
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came he and all his host
against Jerusalem and pitched against it and they built
forts against it round about.
and the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king
Zedekiah.
and on the ninth day of the fourth month the famine prevailed
in the city and there was no bread for the people of the
land.
and the city was broken up and all the men of war fled by
night by the way of the gate between two walls which is by
the king s garden now the Chaldees were against the city
round about and the king went the way toward the plain.
and the army of the Chaldees pursued after the king and
overtook him in the plains of Jericho and all his army were
scattered from him.
so they took the king and brought him up to the king of
Babylon to Riblah and they gave judgment upon him.
and they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes and put
out the eyes of Zedekiah and bound him with fetters of brass
and carried him to Babylon.
and in the fifth month on the seventh day of the month which
is the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
came Nebuzaradan captain of the guard a servant of the king
of Babylon unto Jerusalem
and he burnt the house of the lord and the king s house and
all the houses of Jerusalem and every great man s house burnt
he with fire.
and all the army of the Chaldees that were with the captain
of the guard brake down the walls of Jerusalem round about.
now the rest of the people that were left in the city and the
fugitives that fell away to the king of Babylon with the
remnant of the multitude did Nebuzaradan the captain of the
guard carry away.
but the captain of the guard left of the door of the poor of
the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.
and the pillars of brass that were in the house of the lord
and the bases and the brasen sea that was in the house of the
lord did the Chaldees break in pieces and carried the brass
of them to Babylon.
and the pots and the shovels and the snuffers and the
spoons and all the vessels of brass wherewith they
ministered took they away.
and the firepans and the bowls and such things as were of
gold in gold and of Silver in Silver the captain of the
guard took away.
the two pillars one sea and the bases which Solomon had made
for the house of the lord the brass of all these vessels was
without weight.
the height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits and the
chapiter upon it was brass and the height of the chapiter
three cubits and the wreathen work and pomegranates upon the
chapiter round about all of brass and like unto these had
the second pillar with wreathen work.
and the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest
and Zephaniah the second priest and the three keepers of the
door
and out of the city he took an officer that was set over the
men of war and five men of them that were in the king s
presence which were found in the city and the principal
scribe of the host which mustered the people of the land and
threescore men of the people of the land that were found in
the city
and Nebuzaradan captain of the guard took these and brought
them to the king of Babylon to Riblah
and the king of Babylon smote them and slew them at Riblah in
the land of Hamath. so Judah was carried away out of their
land.
and as for the people that remained in the land of Judah whom
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left even over them he
made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan ruler.
and when all the captains of the armies they and their men
heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah Governor
there came to Gedaliah to Mizpah even Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah and Johanan the son of Careah and Seraiah the son
of Tanhumeth the Netophathite and Jaazaniah the son of a
Maachathite they and their men.
and Gedaliah sware to them and to their men and said unto
them fear not to be the servants of the Chaldees dwell in
the land and serve the king of Babylon and it shall be well
with you.
but it came to pass in the seventh month that Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah the son of Elishama of the seed royal came
and Ten men with him and smote Gedaliah that he died and
the Jews and the Chaldees that were with him at Mizpah.
and all the people both small and great and the captains of
the armies arose and came to Egypt for they were afraid of
the Chaldees.
and it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the
captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah in the twelfth month
on the seven and twentieth day of the month that Evilmerodach
king of Babylon in the year that he began to reign did lift up
the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison
and he spake kindly to him and set his throne above the
throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon
and changed his prison garments and he did eat bread
continually before him all the days of his life.
and his allowance was a continual allowance given him of the
king a daily rate for every day all the days of his life.
Adam Sheth Enosh
Kenan Mahalaleel Jered
Henoch Methuselah Lamech
Noah Shem Ham and Japheth.
the sons of Japheth Gomer and Magog and Madai and Javan
and Tubal and Meshech and Tiras.
and the sons of Gomer Ashchenaz and Riphath and Togarmah.
and the sons of Javan Elishah and Tarshish Kittim and
Dodanim.
the sons of Ham Cush and Mizraim put and Canaan.
and the sons of Cush Seba and Havilah and Sabta and
Raamah and Sabtecha. and the sons of Raamah Sheba and
Dedan.
and Cush begat Nimrod he began to be Mighty upon the earth.
and Mizraim begat Ludim and Anamim and Lehabim and
Naphtuhim
and Pathrusim and Casluhim of whom came the Philistines
and Caphthorim.
and Canaan begat Zidon his firstborn and Heth
the Jebusite also and the Amorite and the Girgashite
and the Hivite and the Arkite and the Sinite
and the Arvadite and the Zemarite and the Hamathite.
the sons of Shem Elam and Asshur and Arphaxad and Lud and
Aram and Uz and Hul and Gether and Meshech.
and Arphaxad begat Shelah and Shelah begat Eber.
and unto Eber were born two sons the name of the one was
Peleg because in his days the earth was divided and his
brother s name was Joktan.
and Joktan begat Almodad and Sheleph and Hazarmaveth and
Jerah
Hadoram also and Uzal and Diklah
and ebal and Abimael and Sheba
and Ophir and Havilah and Jobab. all these were the sons of
Joktan.
Shem Arphaxad Shelah
Eber Peleg Reu
Serug Nahor Terah
Abram the same is Abraham.
the sons of Abraham Isaac and Ishmael.
these are their generations the firstborn of Ishmael
Nebaioth then Kedar and Adbeel and Mibsam
Mishma and Dumah Massa Hadad and Tema
Jetur Naphish and Kedemah. these are the sons of Ishmael.
now the sons of Keturah Abraham s concubine she bare Zimran
and Jokshan and Medan and Midian and Ishbak and Shuah. and
the sons of Jokshan Sheba and Dedan.
and the sons of Midian Ephah and Epher and Henoch and
Abida and Eldaah. all these are the sons of Keturah.
and Abraham begat Isaac. the sons of Isaac Esau and Israel.
the sons of Esau Eliphaz Reuel and Jeush and Jaalam and
Korah.
the sons of Eliphaz Teman and Omar Zephi and Gatam Kenaz
and Timna and Amalek.
the sons of Reuel Nahath Zerah Shammah and Mizzah.
and the sons of Seir Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and Anah
and Dishon and Ezar and Dishan.
and the sons of Lotan Hori and Homam and Timna was Lotan s
sister.
the sons of Shobal Alian and Manahath and ebal Shephi and
Onam. and the sons of Zibeon Aiah and Anah.
the sons of Anah Dishon. and the sons of Dishon Amram and
Eshban and Ithran and Cheran.
the sons of Ezer Bilhan and Zavan and Jakan. the sons of
Dishan Uz and Aran.
now these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom
before any king reigned over the children of Israel Bela the
son of Beor and the name of his city was Dinhabah.
and when Bela was dead Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah
reigned in his stead.
and when Jobab was dead Husham of the land of the Temanites
reigned in his stead.
and when Husham was dead Hadad the son of Bedad which smote
Midian in the field of Moab reigned in his stead and the
name of his city was Avith.
and when Hadad was dead Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his
stead.
and when Samlah was dead Shaul of Rehoboth by the river
reigned in his stead.
and when Shaul was dead Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned
in his stead.
and when Baalhanan was dead Hadad reigned in his stead and
the name of his city was Pai and his wife s name was
Mehetabel the daughter of Matred the daughter of Mezahab.
Hadad died also. and the dukes of Edom were Duke Timnah Duke
Aliah Duke Jetheth
Duke Aholibamah Duke Elah Duke Pinon
Duke Kenaz Duke Teman Duke Mibzar
Duke Magdiel Duke Iram. these are the dukes of Edom.
these are the sons of Israel Reuben Simeon Levi and Judah
Issachar and Zebulun
Dan Joseph and Benjamin Naphtali Gad and Asher.
the sons of Judah Er and Onan and Shelah which three were
born unto him of the daughter of Shua the Canaanitess. and Er
the firstborn of Judah was evil in the sight of the lord and
he slew him.
and Tamar his daughter in law bore him Pharez and Zerah. all
the sons of Judah were five.
the sons of Pharez Hezron and Hamul.
and the sons of Zerah Zimri and Ethan and Heman and
Calcol and Dara five of them in all.
and the sons of Carmi Achar the troubler of Israel who
transgressed in the thing accursed.
and the sons of Ethan Azariah.
the sons also of Hezron that were born unto him Jerahmeel
and Ram and Chelubai.
and Ram begat Amminadab and Amminadab begat Nahshon prince
of the children of Judah
and Nahshon begat Salma and Salma begat Boaz
and Boaz begat Obed and Obed begat Jesse
and Jesse begat his firstborn Eliab and Abinadab the second
and Shimma the third
Nethaneel the fourth Raddai the fifth
Ozem the sixth David the seventh
whose sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. and the sons of
Zeruiah Abishai and Joab and Asahel three.
and Abigail bare Amasa and the father of Amasa was Jether the
Ishmeelite.
and Caleb the son of Hezron begat children of Azubah his wife
and of Jerioth her sons are these Jesher and Shobab and
Ardon.
and when Azubah was dead Caleb took unto him Ephrath which
bare him Hur.
and Hur begat Uri and Uri begat Bezaleel.
and afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the
father of Gilead whom he married when he was threescore years
old and she bare him Segub.
and Segub begat Jair who had three and twenty cities in the
land of Gilead.
and he took Geshur and Aram with the towns of Jair from
them with Kenath and the towns thereof even threescore
cities. all these belonged to the sons of Machir the father of
Gilead.
and after that Hezron was dead in Calebephratah then Abiah
Hezron s wife bare him Ashur the father of Tekoa.
and the sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were Ram
the firstborn and Bunah and Oren and Ozem and Ahijah.
Jerahmeel had also another wife whose name was Atarah she
was the mother of Onam.
and the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were Maaz and
Jamin and Eker.
and the sons of Onam were Shammai and Jada. and the sons of
Shammai Nadab and Abishur.
and the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail and she bare
him Ahban and Molid.
and the sons of Nadab Seled and Appaim but Seled died
without children.
and the sons of Appaim Ishi. and the sons of Ishi Sheshan.
and the children of Sheshan Ahlai.
and the sons of Jada the brother of Shammai Jether and
Jonathan and Jether died without children.
and the sons of Jonathan Peleth and Zaza. these were the
sons of Jerahmeel.
now Sheshan had no sons but daughters. and Sheshan had a
servant an Egyptian whose name was Jarha.
and Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant to wife
and she bare him Attai.
and Attai begat Nathan and Nathan begat Zabad
and Zabad begat Ephlal and Ephlal begat Obed
and Obed begat Jehu and Jehu begat Azariah
and Azariah begat Helez and Helez begat Eleasah
and Eleasah begat Sisamai and Sisamai begat Shallum
and Shallum begat Jekamiah and Jekamiah begat Elishama.
now the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were Mesha his
firstborn which was the father of Ziph and the sons of
Mareshah the father of Hebron.
and the sons of Hebron Korah and Tappuah and Rekem and
Shema.
and Shema begat Raham the father of Jorkoam and Rekem begat
Shammai.
and the son of Shammai was Maon and Maon was the father of
Bethzur.
and Ephah Caleb s concubine bare Haran and Moza and Gazez
and Haran begat Gazez.
and the sons of Jahdai Regem and Jotham and Gesham and
Pelet and Ephah and Shaaph.
Maachah Caleb s concubine bare Sheber and Tirhanah.
she bare also Shaaph the father of Madmannah Sheva the father
of Machbenah and the father of Gibea and the daughter of
Caleb was Achsa.
these were the sons of Caleb the son of Hur the firstborn of
Ephratah Shobal the father of Kirjathjearim.
Salma the father of Bethlehem Hareph the father of Bethgader.
and Shobal the father of Kirjathjearim had sons Haroeh and
half of the Manahethites.
and the families of Kirjathjearim the Ithrites and the
Puhites and the Shumathites and the Mishraites of them came
the Zareathites and the Eshtaulites
the sons of Salma Bethlehem and the Netophathites Ataroth
the house of Joab and half of the Manahethites the Zorites.
and the families of the scribes which dwelt at Jabez the
Tirathites the Shimeathites and Suchathites. these are the
Kenites that came of Hemath the father of the house of
Rechab.
now these were the sons of David which were born unto him in
Hebron the firstborn Amnon of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess the
second Daniel of Abigail the Carmelitess
the third Absalom the son of Maachah the daughter of Talmai
king of Geshur the fourth Adonijah the son of Haggith
the fifth Shephatiah of Abital the sixth Ithream by Eglah
his wife.
these six were born unto him in Hebron and there he reigned
seven years and six months and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty
and three years.
and these were born unto him in Jerusalem Shimea and Shobab
and Nathan and Solomon four of Bathshua the daughter of
Ammiel
Ibhar also and Elishama and Eliphelet
and Nogah and Nepheg and Japhia
and Elishama and Eliada and Eliphelet nine.
these were all the sons of David beside the sons of the
concubines and Tamar their sister.
and Solomon s son was Rehoboam Abia his son Asa his son
Jehoshaphat his son
Joram his son Ahaziah his son Joash his son
Amaziah his son Azariah his son Jotham his son
Ahaz his son Hezekiah his son Manasseh his son
Amon his son Josiah his son.
and the sons of Josiah were the firstborn Johanan the second
Jehoiakim the third Zedekiah the fourth Shallum.
and the sons of Jehoiakim Jeconiah his son Zedekiah his son.
and the sons of Jeconiah Assir Salathiel his son
Malchiram also and Pedaiah and Shenazar Jecamiah Hoshama
and Nedabiah.
and the sons of Pedaiah were Zerubbabel and Shimei and the
sons of Zerubbabel Meshullam and Hananiah and Shelomith
their sister
and Hashubah and Ohel and Berechiah and Hasadiah
Jushabhesed five.
and the sons of Hananiah Pelatiah and Jesaiah the sons of
Rephaiah the sons of Arnan the sons of Obadiah the sons of
Shechaniah.
and the sons of Shechaniah Shemaiah and the sons of
Shemaiah Hattush and Igeal and Bariah and Neariah and
Shaphat six.
and the sons of Neariah Elioenai and Hezekiah and Azrikam
three.
and the sons of Elioenai were Hodaiah and Eliashib and
Pelaiah and Akkub and Johanan and Dalaiah and Anani
seven.
the sons of Judah Pharez Hezron and Carmi and Hur and
Shobal.
and Reaiah the son of Shobal begat Jahath and Jahath begat
Ahumai and Lahad. these are the families of the Zorathites.
and these were of the father of Etam Jezreel and Ishma and
Idbash and the name of their sister was Hazelelponi
and Penuel the father of Gedor and Ezer the father of Hushah.
these are the sons of Hur the firstborn of Ephratah the
father of Bethlehem.
and Ashur the father of Tekoa had two wives Helah and Naarah.
and Naarah bare him Ahuzam and Hepher and Temeni and
Haahashtari. these were the sons of Naarah.
and the sons of Helah were Zereth and Jezoar and Ethnan.
and Coz begat Anub and Zobebah and the families of Aharhel
the son of Harum.
and Jabez was more honourable than his brethren and his
mother called his name Jabez saying because I bare him with
sorrow.
and Jabez called on the God of Israel saying oh that thou
wouldest bless me indeed and enlarge my coast and that thine
hand might be with me and that thou wouldest keep me from
evil that it may not grieve me and God granted him that
which he requested.
and Chelub the brother of Shuah begat Mehir which was the
father of Eshton.
and Eshton begat Bethrapha and Paseah and Tehinnah the
father of Irnahash. these are the men of Rechah.
and the sons of Kenaz Othniel and Seraiah and the sons of
Othniel Hathath.
and Meonothai begat Ophrah and Seraiah begat Joab the father
of the valley of Charashim for they were craftsmen.
and the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh Iru Elah and
Naam and the sons of Elah even Kenaz.
and the sons of Jehaleleel Ziph and Ziphah Tiria and
Asareel.
and the sons of Ezra were Jether and Mered and Epher and
Jalon and she bare Miriam and Shammai and Ishbah the father
of Eshtemoa.
and his wife Jehudijah bare Jered the father of Gedor and
Heber the father of Socho and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah.
and these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh
which Mered took.
and the sons of his wife Hodiah the sister of Naham the
father of Keilah the Garmite and Eshtemoa the Maachathite.
and the sons of Shimon were Amnon and Rinnah Benhanan and
Tilon. and the sons of Ishi were Zoheth and Benzoheth.
the sons of Shelah the son of Judah were Er the father of
Lecah and Laadah the father of Mareshah and the families of
the house of them that wrought fine linen of the house of
Ashbea
and Jokim and the men of Chozeba and Joash and Saraph who
had the dominion in Moab and Jashubilehem. and these are
ancient things.
these were the potters and those that dwelt among plants and
hedges there they dwelt with the king for his work.
the sons of Simeon were Nemuel and Jamin Jarib Zerah and
Shaul
Shallum his son Mibsam his son Mishma his son.
and the sons of Mishma Hamuel his son Zacchur his son
Shimei his son.
and Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters but his
brethren had not many children Neither did all their family
multiply like to the children of Judah.
and they dwelt at Beersheba and Moladah and Hazarshual
and at Bilhah and at Ezem and at Tolad
and at Bethuel and at Hormah and at Ziklag
and at Bethmarcaboth and Hazarsusim and at Bethbirei and at
Shaaraim. these were their cities unto the reign of David.
and their villages were Etam and Ain Rimmon and Tochen
and Ashan five cities
and all their villages that were round about the same cities
unto Baal. these were their habitations and their genealogy.
and Meshobab and Jamlech and Joshah the son of Amaziah
and Joel and Jehu the son of Josibiah the son of Seraiah
the son of Asiel
and Elioenai and Jaakobah and Jeshohaiah and Asaiah and
Adiel and Jesimiel and Benaiah
and Ziza the son of Shiphi the son of Allon the son of
Jedaiah the son of Shimri the son of Shemaiah
these mentioned by their names were princes in their families
and the house of their fathers increased greatly.
and they went to the entrance of Gedor even unto the east
side of the valley to seek pasture for their flocks.
and they found fat pasture and good and the land was wide
and quiet and peaceable for they of Ham had dwelt there of
old.
and these written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of
Judah and smote their tents and the habitations that were
found there and destroyed them utterly unto this day and
dwelt in their rooms because there was pasture there for
their flocks.
and some of them even of the sons of Simeon five hundred
men went to mount Seir having for their captains Pelatiah
and Neariah and Rephaiah and Uzziel the sons of Ishi.
and they smote the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped
and dwelt there unto this day.
now the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel for he was
the firstborn but forasmuch as he defiled his father s bed
his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of
Israel and the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the
birthright.
for Judah prevailed above his brethren and of him came the
chief ruler but the birthright was Joseph s
the sons I say of Reuben the firstborn of Israel were
Hanoch and Pallu Hezron and Carmi.
the sons of Joel Shemaiah his son Gog his son Shimei his
son
Micah his son Reaia his son Baal his son
Beerah his son whom Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria carried
away captive he was prince of the Reubenites.
and his brethren by their families when the genealogy of
their generations was reckoned were the chief Jeiel and
Zechariah
and Bela the son of Azaz the son of Shema the son of Joel
who dwelt in Aroer even unto Nebo and Baalmeon
and eastward he inhabited unto the entering in of the
wilderness from the river Euphrates because their cattle were
multiplied in the land of Gilead.
and in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagarites who
fell by their hand and they dwelt in their tents throughout
all the east land of Gilead.
and the children of Gad dwelt over against them in the land
of Bashan unto Salcah
Joel the chief and Shapham the next and Jaanai and Shaphat
in Bashan.
and their brethren of the house of their fathers were
Michael and Meshullam and Sheba and Jorai and Jachan and
Zia and Heber seven.
these are the children of Abihail the son of Huri the son of
Jaroah the son of Gilead the son of Michael the son of
Jeshishai the son of Jahdo the son of Buz
Ahi the son of Abdiel the son of Guni chief of the house of
their fathers.
and they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan and in her towns and in
all the suburbs of Sharon upon their borders.
all these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham
king of Judah and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.
the sons of Reuben and the Gadites and half the tribe of
Manasseh of valiant men men able to bear buckler and sword
and to shoot with bow and skilful in war were four and forty
thousand seven hundred and threescore that went out to the
war.
and they made war with the Hagarites with Jetur and Nephish
and Nodab.
and they were helped against them and the Hagarites were
delivered into their hand and all that were with them for
they cried to God in the battle and he was intreated of them
because they put their trust in him.
and they took away their cattle of their camels fifty
thousand and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand and of
asses two thousand and of men an hundred thousand.
for there fell down many slain because the war was of God.
and they dwelt in their steads until the captivity.
and the children of the half tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the
land they increased from Bashan unto Baalhermon and Senir
and unto mount Hermon.
and these were the heads of the house of their fathers even
Epher and Ishi and Eliel and Azriel and Jeremiah and
Hodaviah and Jahdiel Mighty men of valour famous men and
heads of the house of their fathers.
and they transgressed against the God of their fathers and
went a whoring after the gods of the people of the land whom
God destroyed before them.
and the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of
Assyria and the spirit of Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria
and he carried them away even the Reubenites and the
Gadites and the half tribe of Manasseh and brought them unto
Halah and Habor and Hara and to the river Gozan unto this
day.
the sons of Levi Gershon Kohath and Merari.
and the sons of Kohath Amram Izhar and Hebron and Uzziel.
and the children of Amram Aaron and Moses and Miriam. the
sons also of Aaron Nadab and Abihu Eleazar and Ithamar.
Eleazar begat Phinehas Phinehas begat Abishua
and Abishua begat Bukki and Bukki begat Uzzi
and Uzzi begat Zerahiah and Zerahiah begat Meraioth
Meraioth begat Amariah and Amariah begat Ahitub
and Ahitub begat Zadok and Zadok begat Ahimaaz
and Ahimaaz begat Azariah and Azariah begat Johanan
and Johanan begat Azariah he it is that executed the
priest s office in the temple that Solomon built in
Jerusalem
and Azariah begat Amariah and Amariah begat Ahitub
and Ahitub begat Zadok and Zadok begat Shallum
and Shallum begat Hilkiah and Hilkiah begat Azariah
and Azariah begat Seraiah and Seraiah begat Jehozadak
and Jehozadak went into captivity when the lord carried away
Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.
the sons of Levi Gershom Kohath and Merari.
and these be the names of the sons of Gershom Libni and
Shimei.
and the sons of Kohath were Amram and Izhar and Hebron and
Uzziel.
the sons of Merari Mahli and Mushi. and these are the
families of the Levites according to their fathers.
of Gershom Libni his son Jahath his son Zimmah his son
Joah his son Iddo his son Zerah his son Jeaterai his son.
the sons of Kohath Amminadab his son Korah his son Assir
his son
Elkanah his son and Ebiasaph his son and Assir his son
Tahath his son Uriel his son Uzziah his son and Shaul his
son.
and the sons of Elkanah Amasai and Ahimoth.
as for Elkanah the sons of Elkanah Zophai his son and
Nahath his son
Eliab his son Jeroham his son Elkanah his son.
and the sons of Samuel the firstborn Vashni and Abiah.
the sons of Merari Mahli Libni his son Shimei his son Uzza
his son
Shimea his son Haggiah his son Asaiah his son.
and these are they whom David set over the service of song in
the house of the lord after that the ark had rest.
and they ministered before the dwelling place of the
tabernacle of the congregation with singing until Solomon had
built the house of the lord in Jerusalem and then they waited
on their office according to their order.
and these are they that waited with their children. of the
sons of the Kohathites Heman a singer the son of Joel the
son of Shemuel
the son of Elkanah the son of Jeroham the son of Eliel the
son of Toah
the son of Zuph the son of Elkanah the son of Mahath the
son of Amasai
the son of Elkanah the son of Joel the son of Azariah the
son of Zephaniah
the son of Tahath the son of Assir the son of Ebiasaph the
son of Korah
the son of Izhar the son of Kohath the son of Levi the son
of Israel.
and his brother Asaph who stood on his right hand even Asaph
the son of Berachiah the son of Shimea
the son of Michael the son of Baaseiah the son of Malchiah
the son of Ethni the son of Zerah the son of Adaiah
the son of Ethan the son of Zimmah the son of Shimei
the son of Jahath the son of Gershom the son of Levi.
and their brethren the sons of Merari stood on the left hand
Ethan the son of Kishi the son of Abdi the son of Malluch
the son of Hashabiah the son of Amaziah the son of Hilkiah
the son of Amzi the son of Bani the son of Shamer
the son of Mahli the son of Mushi the son of Merari the son
of Levi.
their brethren also the Levites were appointed unto all manner
of service of the tabernacle of the house of God.
but Aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of the burnt
offering and on the altar of incense and were appointed for
all the work of the place most holy and to make an atonement
for Israel according to all that Moses the servant of God had
commanded.
and these are the sons of Aaron Eleazar his son Phinehas his
son Abishua his son
Bukki his son Uzzi his son Zerahiah his son
Meraioth his son Amariah his son Ahitub his son
Zadok his son Ahimaaz his son.
now these are their dwelling places throughout their castles
in their coasts of the sons of Aaron of the families of the
Kohathites for theirs was the Lot.
and they gave them Hebron in the land of Judah and the
suburbs thereof round about it.
but the fields of the city and the villages thereof they
gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
and to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of Judah
namely Hebron the city of refuge and Libnah with her
suburbs and Jattir and Eshtemoa with their suburbs
and Hilen with her suburbs Debir with her suburbs
and Ashan with her suburbs and Bethshemesh with her suburbs
and out of the tribe of Benjamin Geba with her suburbs and
Alemeth with her suburbs and Anathoth with her suburbs. all
their cities throughout their families were thirteen cities.
and unto the sons of Kohath which were left of the family of
that tribe were cities given out of the half tribe namely
out of the half tribe of Manasseh by Lot Ten cities.
and to the sons of Gershom throughout their families out of
the tribe of Issachar and out of the tribe of Asher and out
of the tribe of Naphtali and out of the tribe of Manasseh in
Bashan thirteen cities.
unto the sons of Merari were given by Lot throughout their
families out of the tribe of Reuben and out of the tribe of
Gad and out of the tribe of Zebulun twelve cities.
and the children of Israel gave to the Levites these cities
with their suburbs.
and they gave by Lot out of the tribe of the children of
Judah and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon and out
of the tribe of the children of Benjamin these cities which
are called by their names.
and the residue of the families of the sons of Kohath had
cities of their coasts out of the tribe of Ephraim.
and they gave unto them of the cities of refuge Shechem in
mount Ephraim with her suburbs they gave also Gezer with her
suburbs
and Jokmeam with her suburbs and Bethhoron with her suburbs
and Aijalon with her suburbs and Gathrimmon with her suburbs
and out of the half tribe of Manasseh Aner with her suburbs
and Bileam with her suburbs for the family of the remnant of
the sons of Kohath.
unto the sons of Gershom were given out of the family of the
half tribe of Manasseh Golan in Bashan with her suburbs and
Ashtaroth with her suburbs
and out of the tribe of Issachar Kedesh with her suburbs
Daberath with her suburbs
and Ramoth with her suburbs and Anem with her suburbs
and out of the tribe of Asher Mashal with her suburbs and
Abdon with her suburbs
and Hukok with her suburbs and Rehob with her suburbs
and out of the tribe of Naphtali Kedesh in Galilee with her
suburbs and Hammon with her suburbs and Kirjathaim with her
suburbs.
unto the rest of the children of Merari were given out of the
tribe of Zebulun Rimmon with her suburbs Tabor with her
suburbs
and on the other side Jordan by Jericho on the east side of
Jordan were given them out of the tribe of Reuben Bezer in
the wilderness with her suburbs and Jahzah with her suburbs
Kedemoth also with her suburbs and Mephaath with her suburbs
and out of the tribe of Gad Ramoth in Gilead with her
suburbs and Mahanaim with her suburbs
and Heshbon with her suburbs and Jazer with her suburbs.
now the sons of Issachar were Tola and Puah Jashub and
Shimrom four.
and the sons of Tola Uzzi and Rephaiah and Jeriel and
Jahmai and Jibsam and Shemuel heads of their father s
house to wit of Tola they were valiant men of might in
their generations whose number was in the days of David two
and twenty thousand and six hundred.
and the sons of Uzzi Izrahiah and the sons of Izrahiah
Michael and Obadiah and Joel Ishiah five all of them
chief men.
and with them by their generations after the house of their
fathers were Bands of soldiers for war six and thirty
thousand men for they had many wives and sons.
and their brethren among all the families of Issachar were
valiant men of might reckoned in all by their genealogies
fourscore and seven thousand.
the sons of Benjamin Bela and Becher and Jediael three.
and the sons of Bela Ezbon and Uzzi and Uzziel and
Jerimoth and Iri five heads of the house of their fathers
Mighty men of valour and were reckoned by their genealogies
twenty and two thousand and thirty and four.
and the sons of Becher Zemira and Joash and Eliezer and
Elioenai and Omri and Jerimoth and Abiah and Anathoth and
Alameth. all these are the sons of Becher.
and the number of them after their genealogy by their
generations heads of the house of their fathers Mighty men
of valour was twenty thousand and two hundred.
the sons also of Jediael Bilhan and the sons of Bilhan
Jeush and Benjamin and Ehud and Chenaanah and Zethan and
Tharshish and Ahishahar.
all these the sons of Jediael by the heads of their fathers
Mighty men of valour were seventeen thousand and two hundred
soldiers fit to go out for war and battle.
Shuppim also and Huppim the children of Ir and Hushim the
sons of Aher.
the sons of Naphtali Jahziel and Guni and Jezer and
Shallum the sons of Bilhah.
the sons of Manasseh Ashriel whom she bare but his
concubine the Aramitess bare Machir the father of Gilead
and Machir took to wife the sister of Huppim and Shuppim
whose sister s name was Maachah and the name of the second
was Zelophehad and Zelophehad had daughters.
and Maachah the wife of Machir bare a son and she called his
name Peresh and the name of his brother was Sheresh and his
sons were Ulam and Rakem.
and the sons of Ulam Bedan. these were the sons of Gilead
the son of Machir the son of Manasseh.
and his sister Hammoleketh bare Ishod and Abiezer and
Mahalah.
and the sons of Shemidah were Ahian and Shechem and Likhi
and Aniam.
and the sons of Ephraim Shuthelah and Bered his son and
Tahath his son and Eladah his son and Tahath his son
and Zabad his son and Shuthelah his son and Ezer and Elead
whom the men of Gath that were born in that land slew because
they came down to take away their cattle.
and Ephraim their father mourned many days and his brethren
came to comfort him.
and when he went in to his wife she conceived and bare a
son and he called his name Beriah because it went evil with
his house.
 and his daughter was Sherah who built Bethhoron the nether
and the upper and Uzzensherah.
and Rephah was his son also Resheph and Telah his son and
Tahan his son.
Laadan his son Ammihud his son Elishama his son.
non his son Jehoshuah his son.
and their possessions and habitations were Bethel and the
towns thereof and eastward Naaran and westward Gezer with
the towns thereof Shechem also and the towns thereof unto
Gaza and the towns thereof
and by the borders of the children of Manasseh Bethshean and
her towns Taanach and her towns Megiddo and her towns Dor
and her towns. in these dwelt the children of Joseph the son
of Israel.
the sons of Asher Imnah and Isuah and Ishuai and Beriah
and Serah their sister.
and the sons of Beriah Heber and Malchiel who is the father
of Birzavith.
and Heber begat Japhlet and Shomer and Hotham and Shua
their sister.
and the sons of Japhlet Pasach and Bimhal and Ashvath.
these are the children of Japhlet.
and the sons of Shamer Ahi and Rohgah Jehubbah and Aram.
and the sons of his brother Helem Zophah and Imna and
Shelesh and Amal.
the sons of Zophah Suah and Harnepher and Shual and Beri
and Imrah
Bezer and Hod and Shamma and Shilshah and Ithran and
Beera.
and the sons of Jether Jephunneh and Pispah and Ara.
and the sons of Ulla Arah and Haniel and Rezia.
all these were the children of Asher heads of their father s
house choice and Mighty men of valour chief of the princes.
and the number throughout the genealogy of them that were apt
to the war and to battle was twenty and six thousand men.
now Benjamin begat Bela his firstborn Ashbel the second and
Aharah the third
Nohah the fourth and Rapha the fifth.
and the sons of Bela were Addar and Gera and Abihud
and Abishua and Naaman and Ahoah
and Gera and Shephuphan and Huram.
and these are the sons of Ehud these are the heads of the
fathers of the inhabitants of Geba and they removed them to
Manahath
and Naaman and Ahiah and Gera he removed them and begat
Uzza and Ahihud.
and Shaharaim begat children in the country of Moab after he
had sent them away Hushim and Baara were his wives.
and he begat of Hodesh his wife Jobab and Zibia and Mesha
and Malcham
and Jeuz and Shachia and Mirma. these were his sons heads
of the fathers.
and of Hushim he begat Abitub and Elpaal.
the sons of Elpaal Eber and Misham and Shamed who built
Ono and Lod with the towns thereof
Beriah also and Shema who were heads of the fathers of the
inhabitants of Aijalon who drove away the inhabitants of
Gath
and Ahio Shashak and Jeremoth
and Zebadiah and Arad and Ader
and Michael and Ispah and Joha the sons of Beriah
and Zebadiah and Meshullam and Hezeki and Heber
Ishmerai also and Jezliah and Jobab the sons of Elpaal
and Jakim and Zichri and Zabdi
and Elienai and Zilthai and Eliel
and Adaiah and Beraiah and Shimrath the sons of Shimhi
and Ishpan and Heber and Eliel
and Abdon and Zichri and Hanan
and Hananiah and Elam and Antothijah
and Iphedeiah and Penuel the sons of Shashak
and Shamsherai and Shehariah and Athaliah
and Jaresiah and Eliah and Zichri the sons of Jeroham.
these were heads of the fathers by their generations chief
men. these dwelt in Jerusalem.
and at Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon whose wife s name
was Maachah
and his firstborn son Abdon and Zur and Kish and Baal and
Nadab
and Gedor and Ahio and Zacher.
and Mikloth begat Shimeah. and these also dwelt with their
brethren in Jerusalem over against them.
and Ner begat Kish and Kish begat Saul and Saul begat
Jonathan and Malchishua and Abinadab and Eshbaal.
and the son of Jonathan was Meribbaal and Meribbaal begat
Micah.
and the sons of Micah were Pithon and Melech and Tarea and
Ahaz.
and Ahaz begat Jehoadah and Jehoadah begat Alemeth and
Azmaveth and Zimri and Zimri begat Moza
and Moza begat Binea Rapha was his son Eleasah his son Azel
his son
and Azel had six sons whose names are these Azrikam
Bocheru and Ishmael and Sheariah and Obadiah and Hanan.
all these were the sons of Azel.
and the sons of Eshek his brother were Ulam his firstborn
Jehush the second and Eliphelet the third.
and the sons of Ulam were Mighty men of valour archers and
had many sons and sons sons an hundred and fifty. all these
are of the sons of Benjamin.
so all Israel were reckoned by genealogies and behold they
were written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah who
were carried away to Babylon for their transgression.
now the first inhabitants that dwelt in their possessions in
their cities were the Israelites the priests Levites and
the Nethinims.
and in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah and of the
children of Benjamin and of the children of Ephraim and
Manasseh
Uthai the son of Ammihud the son of Omri the son of Imri
the son of Bani of the children of Pharez the son of Judah.
and of the Shilonites Asaiah the firstborn and his sons.
and of the sons of Zerah Jeuel and their brethren six
hundred and ninety.
and of the sons of Benjamin Sallu the son of Meshullam the
son of Hodaviah the son of Hasenuah
and Ibneiah the son of Jeroham and Elah the son of Uzzi the
son of Michri and Meshullam the son of Shephathiah the son
of Reuel the son of Ibnijah
and their brethren according to their generations nine
hundred and fifty and six. all these men were chief of the
fathers in the house of their fathers.
and of the priests Jedaiah and Jehoiarib and Jachin
and Azariah the son of Hilkiah the son of Meshullam the son
of Zadok the son of Meraioth the son of Ahitub the ruler of
the house of God
and Adaiah the son of Jeroham the son of Pashur the son of
Malchijah and Maasiai the son of Adiel the son of Jahzerah
the son of Meshullam the son of Meshillemith the son of
Immer
and their brethren heads of the house of their fathers a
thousand and seven hundred and threescore very able men for
the work of the service of the house of God.
and of the Levites Shemaiah the son of Hasshub the son of
Azrikam the son of Hashabiah of the sons of Merari
and Bakbakkar Heresh and Galal and Mattaniah the son of
Micah the son of Zichri the son of Asaph
and Obadiah the son of Shemaiah the son of Galal the son of
Jeduthun and Berechiah the son of Asa the son of Elkanah
that dwelt in the villages of the Netophathites.
and the porters were Shallum and Akkub and Talmon and
Ahiman and their brethren Shallum was the chief
who hitherto waited in the king s gate eastward they were
porters in the companies of the children of Levi.
and Shallum the son of Kore the son of Ebiasaph the son of
Korah and his brethren of the house of his father the
Korahites were over the work of the service keepers of the
gates of the tabernacle and their fathers being over the
host of the lord were keepers of the entry.
and Phinehas the son of Eleazar was the ruler over them in
time past and the lord was with him.
and Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was porter of the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.
all these which were chosen to be porters in the gates were
two hundred and twelve. these were reckoned by their genealogy
in their villages whom David and Samuel the seer did ordain
in their set office.
so they and their children had the oversight of the gates of
the house of the lord namely the house of the tabernacle by
wards.
in four quarters were the porters toward the east west
north and south.
and their brethren which were in their villages were to come
after seven days from time to time with them.
for these Levites the four chief porters were in their set
office and were over the chambers and treasuries of the house
of God.
and they lodged round about the house of God because the
charge was upon them and the opening thereof every morning
pertained to them.
and certain of them had the charge of the ministering vessels
that they should bring them in and out by tale.
some of them also were appointed to oversee the vessels and
all the instruments of the sanctuary and the fine flour and
the wine and the oil and the frankincense and the spices.
and some of the sons of the priests made the ointment of the
spices.
and Mattithiah one of the Levites who was the firstborn of
Shallum the Korahite had the set office over the things that
were made in the pans.
and other of their brethren of the sons of the Kohathites
were over the shewbread to prepare it every sabbath.
and these are the singers chief of the fathers of the
Levites who remaining in the chambers were free for they
were employed in that work day and night.
these chief fathers of the Levites were chief throughout their
generations these dwelt at Jerusalem.
and in Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon Jehiel whose wife s
name was Maachah
and his firstborn son Abdon then Zur and Kish and Baal and
Ner and Nadab.
and Gedor and Ahio and Zechariah and Mikloth.
and Mikloth begat Shimeam. and they also dwelt with their
brethren at Jerusalem over against their brethren.
and Ner begat Kish and Kish begat Saul and Saul begat
Jonathan and Malchishua and Abinadab and Eshbaal.
and the son of Jonathan was Meribbaal and Meribbaal begat
Micah.
and the sons of Micah were Pithon and Melech and Tahrea
and Ahaz.
and Ahaz begat Jarah and Jarah begat Alemeth and Azmaveth
and Zimri and Zimri begat Moza
and Moza begat Binea and Rephaiah his son Eleasah his son
Azel his son.
and Azel had six sons whose names are these Azrikam
Bocheru and Ishmael and Sheariah and Obadiah and Hanan
these were the sons of Azel.
now the Philistines fought against Israel and the men of
Israel fled from before the Philistines and fell down slain
in mount Gilboa.
and the Philistines followed hard after Saul and after his
sons and the Philistines slew Jonathan and Abinadab and
Malchishua the sons of Saul.
and the battle went sore against Saul and the archers hit
him and he was wounded of the archers.
then said Saul to his armourbearer draw thy sword and thrust
me through therewith lest these uncircumcised come and abuse
me. but his armourbearer would not for he was sore afraid. so
Saul took a sword and fell upon it.
and when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead he fell
likewise on the sword and died.
so Saul died and his three sons and all his house died
together.
and when all the men of Israel that were in the valley saw
that they fled and that Saul and his sons were dead then
they forsook their cities and fled and the Philistines came
and dwelt in them.
and it came to pass on the morrow when the Philistines came
to strip the slain that they found Saul and his sons fallen
in mount Gilboa.
and when they had stripped him they took his head and his
armour and sent into the land of the Philistines round about
to carry tidings unto their idols and to the people.
and they put his armour in the house of their gods and
fastened his head in the temple of Dagon.
and when all Jabeshgilead heard all that the Philistines had
done to Saul
they arose all the valiant men and took away the body of
Saul and the bodies of his sons and brought them to Jabesh
and buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh and fasted
seven days.
so Saul died for his transgression which he committed against
the lord even against the word of the lord which he kept
not and also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar
spirit to enquire of it
and enquired not of the lord therefore he slew him and
turned the kingdom unto David the son of Jesse.
then all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron
saying behold we are thy bone and thy flesh.
and moreover in time past even when Saul was king thou wast
he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel and the lord thy
God said unto thee thou shalt feed my people Israel and thou
shalt be ruler over my people Israel.
therefore came all the elders of Israel to the king to Hebron
and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the lord
and they anointed David king over Israel according to the
word of the lord by Samuel.
and David and all Israel went to Jerusalem which is Jebus
where the Jebusites were the inhabitants of the land.
and the inhabitants of Jebus said to David thou shalt not
come hither. nevertheless David took the castle of Zion which
is the city of David.
and David said whosoever smiteth the Jebusites first shall be
chief and captain. so Joab the son of Zeruiah went first up
and was chief.
and David dwelt in the castle therefore they called it the
city of David.
and he built the city round about even from Millo round
about and Joab repaired the rest of the city.
so David waxed greater and greater for the lord of hosts was
with him.
these also are the chief of the Mighty men whom David had who
strengthened themselves with him in his kingdom and with all
Israel to make him king according to the word of the lord
concerning Israel.
and this is the number of the Mighty men whom David had
Jashobeam an Hachmonite the chief of the captains he lifted
up his spear against three hundred slain by him at one time.
and after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite who
was one of the three mighties.
he was with David at Pasdammim and there the Philistines were
gathered together to battle where was a parcel of ground full
of barley and the people fled from before the Philistines.
and they set themselves in the midst of that parcel and
delivered it and slew the Philistines and the lord saved
them by a great deliverance.
now three of the thirty captains went down to the rock to
David into the cave of Adullam and the host of the
Philistines encamped in the valley of Rephaim.
and David was then in the hold and the Philistines garrison
was then at Bethlehem.
and David longed and said oh that one would give me drink of
the water of the well of Bethlehem that is at the gate
and the three brake through the host of the Philistines and
drew water out of the well of Bethlehem that was by the gate
and took it and brought it to David but David would not
drink of it but poured it out to the lord.
and said my God forbid it me that I should do this thing
shall I drink the blood of these men that have put their lives
in jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives they brought
it. therefore he would not drink it. these things did these
three mightiest.
and Abishai the brother of Joab he was chief of the three
for lifting up his spear against three hundred he slew them
and had a name among the three.
of the three he was more honourable than the two for he was
their captain howbeit he attained not to the first three.
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada the son of a valiant man of
Kabzeel who had done many acts he slew two lionlike men of
Moab also he went down and slew a lion in a pit in a snowy
day.
and he slew an Egyptian a man of great stature five cubits
high and in the Egyptian s hand was a spear like a weaver s
beam and he went down to him with a staff and plucked the
spear out of the Egyptian s hand and slew him with his own
spear.
these things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada and had the name
among the three mighties.
behold he was honourable among the thirty but attained not
to the first three and David set him over his guard.
also the valiant men of the armies were Asahel the brother of
Joab Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem
Shammoth the Harorite Helez the Pelonite
Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite Abiezer the Antothite
Sibbecai the Hushathite Ilai the Ahohite
Maharai the Netophathite Heled the son of Baanah the
Netophathite
Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah that pertained to the
children of Benjamin Benaiah the Pirathonite
Hurai of the brooks of Gaash Abiel the Arbathite
Azmaveth the Baharumite Eliahba the Shaalbonite
the sons of Hashem the Gizonite Jonathan the son of Shage the
Hararite
Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite Eliphal the son of Ur
Hepher the Mecherathite Ahijah the Pelonite
Hezro the Carmelite Naarai the son of Ezbai
Joel the brother of Nathan Mibhar the son of Haggeri
Zelek the Ammonite Naharai the Berothite the armourbearer of
Joab the son of Zeruiah
Ira the Ithrite Gareb the Ithrite
Uriah the Hittite Zabad the son of Ahlai
Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite a captain of the
Reubenites and thirty with him
Hanan the son of Maachah and Joshaphat the Mithnite
Uzzia the Ashterathite Shama and Jehiel the sons of Hothan
the Aroerite
Jediael the son of Shimri and Joha his brother the Tizite
Eliel the Mahavite and Jeribai and Joshaviah the sons of
Elnaam and Ithmah the Moabite
Eliel and Obed and Jasiel the Mesobaite.
now these are they that came to David to Ziklag while he yet
kept himself close because of Saul the son of Kish and they
were among the Mighty men helpers of the war.
they were armed with bows and could use both the right hand
and the left in hurling stones and shooting arrows out of a
bow even of Saul s brethren of Benjamin.
the chief was Ahiezer then Joash the sons of Shemaah the
Gibeathite and Jeziel and Pelet the sons of Azmaveth and
Berachah and Jehu the Antothite.
and Ismaiah the Gibeonite a Mighty man among the thirty and
over the thirty and Jeremiah and Jahaziel and Johanan and
Josabad the Gederathite
Eluzai and Jerimoth and Bealiah and Shemariah and
Shephatiah the Haruphite
Elkanah and Jesiah and Azareel and Joezer and Jashobeam
the Korhites
and Joelah and Zebadiah the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.
and of the Gadites there separated themselves unto David into
the hold to the wilderness men of might and men of war fit
for the battle that could handle shield and buckler whose
faces were like the faces of lions and were as swift as the
roes upon the mountains
Ezer the first Obadiah the second Eliab the third
Mishmannah the fourth Jeremiah the fifth
Attai the sixth Eliel the seventh
Johanan the eighth Elzabad the ninth
Jeremiah the tenth Machbanai the eleventh.
these were of the sons of Gad captains of the host one of
the least was over an hundred and the greatest over a
thousand.
these are they that went over Jordan in the first month when
it had overflown all his banks and they put to flight all
them of the valleys both toward the east and toward the
west.
and there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the
hold unto David.
and David went out to meet them and answered and said unto
them if ye be come peaceably unto me to help me mine heart
shall be knit unto you but if ye be come to betray me to mine
enemies seeing there is no wrong in mine hands the God of
our fathers look thereon and rebuke it.
then the spirit came upon Amasai who was chief of the
captains and he said thine are we David and on thy side
thou son of Jesse peace peace be unto thee and peace be to
thine helpers for thy God helpeth thee. then David received
them and made them captains of the band.
and there fell some of Manasseh to David when he came with
the Philistines against Saul to battle but they helped them
not for the lords of the Philistines upon advisement sent him
away saying he will fall to his Master Saul to the jeopardy
of our heads.
as he went to Ziklag there fell to him of Manasseh Adnah
and Jozabad and Jediael and Michael and Jozabad and Elihu
and Zilthai captains of the thousands that were of Manasseh.
and they helped David against the band of the rovers for they
were all Mighty men of valour and were captains in the host.
for at that time day by day there came to David to help him
until it was a great host like the host of God.
and these are the numbers of the Bands that were ready armed
to the war and came to David to Hebron to turn the kingdom
of Saul to him according to the word of the lord.
the children of Judah that bare shield and spear were six
thousand and eight hundred ready armed to the war.
of the children of Simeon Mighty men of valour for the war
seven thousand and one hundred.
of the children of Levi four thousand and six hundred.
and Jehoiada was the leader of the Aaronites and with him
were three thousand and seven hundred
and Zadok a young man Mighty of valour and of his father s
house twenty and two captains.
and of the children of Benjamin the kindred of Saul three
thousand for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the
ward of the house of Saul.
and of the children of Ephraim twenty thousand and eight
hundred Mighty men of valour famous throughout the house of
their fathers.
and of the half tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand which
were expressed by name to come and make David king.
and of the children of Issachar which were men that had
understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do
the heads of them were two hundred and all their brethren
were at their commandment.
of Zebulun such as went forth to battle expert in war with
all instruments of war fifty thousand which could keep rank
they were not of double heart.
and of Naphtali a thousand captains and with them with shield
and spear thirty and seven thousand.
and of the Danites expert in war twenty and eight thousand and
six hundred.
and of Asher such as went forth to battle expert in war
forty thousand.
and on the other side of Jordan of the Reubenites and the
Gadites and of the half tribe of Manasseh with all manner of
instruments of war for the battle an hundred and twenty
thousand.
all these men of war that could keep rank came with a
perfect heart to Hebron to make David king over all Israel
and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make
David king.
and there they were with David three days eating and
drinking for their brethren had prepared for them.
moreover they that were nigh them even unto Issachar and
Zebulun and Naphtali brought bread on asses and on camels
and on mules and on oxen and meat meal cakes of figs and
bunches of raisins and wine and oil and oxen and sheep
abundantly for there was joy in Israel.
and David consulted with the captains of thousands and
hundreds and with every leader.
and David said unto all the congregation of Israel if it seem
good unto you and that it be of the lord our God let us send
abroad unto our brethren every where that are left in all the
land of Israel and with them also to the priests and Levites
which are in their cities and suburbs that they may gather
themselves unto us
and let us bring again the ark of our God to us for we
enquired not at it in the days of Saul.
and all the congregation said that they would do so for the
thing was right in the eyes of all the people.
so David gathered all Israel together from Shihor of Egypt
even unto the entering of Hemath to bring the ark of God from
Kirjathjearim.
and David went up and all Israel to Baalah that is to
Kirjathjearim which belonged to Judah to bring up thence the
ark of God the lord that dwelleth between the Cherubims
whose name is called on it.
and they carried the ark of God in a new cart out of the house
of Abinadab and Uzza and Ahio drave the cart.
and David and all Israel played before God with all their
might and with singing and with harps and with psalteries
and with timbrels and with cymbals and with trumpets.
and when they came unto the threshingfloor of Chidon Uzza put
forth his hand to hold the ark for the oxen stumbled.
and the anger of the lord was kindled against Uzza and he
smote him because he put his hand to the ark and there he
died before God.
and David was displeased because the lord had made a breach
upon Uzza wherefore that place is called Perezuzza to this
day.
and David was afraid of God that day saying how shall I
bring the ark of God home to me?
so David brought not the ark home to himself to the city of
David but carried it aside into the house of Obededom the
Gittite.
and the ark of God remained with the family of Obededom in his
house three months. and the lord blessed the house of
Obededom and all that he had.
now Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David and timber of
cedars with masons and carpenters to build him an house.
and David perceived that the lord had confirmed him king over
Israel for his kingdom was lifted up on high because of his
people Israel.
and David took more wives at Jerusalem and David begat more
sons and daughters.
now these are the names of his children which he had in
Jerusalem Shammua and Shobab Nathan and Solomon
and Ibhar and Elishua and Elpalet
and Nogah and Nepheg and Japhia
and Elishama and Beeliada and Eliphalet.
and when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king
over all Israel all the Philistines went up to seek David.
and David heard of it and went out against them.
and the Philistines came and spread themselves in the valley
of Rephaim.
and David enquired of God saying shall I go up against the
Philistines? and wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? and
the lord said unto him go up for I will deliver them into
thine hand.
so they came up to Baalperazim and David smote them there.
then David said God hath broken in upon mine enemies by mine
hand like the breaking forth of waters therefore they called
the name of that place Baalperazim.
and when they had left their gods there David gave a
commandment and they were burned with fire.
and the Philistines yet again spread themselves abroad in the
valley.
therefore David enquired again of God and God said unto him
go not up after them turn away from them and come upon them
over against the mulberry trees.
and it shall be when thou shalt hear a sound of going in the
tops of the mulberry trees that then thou shalt go out to
battle for God is gone forth before thee to smite the host of
the Philistines.
David therefore did as God commanded him and they smote the
host of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gazer.
and the fame of David went out into all lands and the lord
brought the fear of him upon all nations.
and David made him houses in the city of David and prepared a
place for the ark of God and pitched for it a tent.
then David said none ought to carry the ark of God but the
Levites for them hath the lord chosen to carry the ark of
God and to minister unto him for ever.
and David gathered all Israel together to Jerusalem to bring
up the ark of the lord unto his place which he had prepared
for it.
and David assembled the children of Aaron and the Levites
of the sons of Kohath Uriel the chief and his brethren an
hundred and twenty
of the sons of Merari Asaiah the chief and his brethren two
hundred and twenty
of the sons of Gershom Joel the chief and his brethren an
hundred and thirty
of the sons of Elizaphan Shemaiah the chief and his brethren
two hundred
of the sons of Hebron Eliel the chief and his brethren
fourscore
of the sons of Uzziel Amminadab the chief and his brethren
an hundred and twelve.
and David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests and for
the Levites for Uriel Asaiah and Joel Shemaiah and Eliel
and Amminadab
and said unto them ye are the chief of the fathers of the
Levites sanctify yourselves both ye and your brethren that
ye may bring up the ark of the lord God of Israel unto the
place that I have prepared for it.
for because ye did it not at the first the lord our God made
a breach upon us for that we sought him not after the due
order.
so the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring
up the ark of the lord God of Israel.
and the children of the Levites bare the ark of God upon their
shoulders with the staves thereon as Moses commanded
according to the word of the lord.
and David spake to the chief of the Levites to appoint their
brethren to be the singers with instruments of musick
psalteries and harps and cymbals sounding by lifting up the
voice with joy.
so the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel and of his
brethren Asaph the son of Berechiah and of the sons of
Merari their brethren Ethan the son of Kushaiah
and with them their brethren of the second degree Zechariah
Ben and Jaaziel and Shemiramoth and Jehiel and Unni
Eliab and Benaiah and Maaseiah and Mattithiah and
Elipheleh and Mikneiah and Obededom and Jeiel the porters.
so the singers Heman Asaph and Ethan were appointed to
sound with cymbals of brass
and Zechariah and Aziel and Shemiramoth and Jehiel and
Unni and Eliab and Maaseiah and Benaiah with psalteries on
Alamoth
and Mattithiah and Elipheleh and Mikneiah and Obededom and
Jeiel and Azaziah with harps on the Sheminith to excel.
and Chenaniah chief of the Levites was for song he
instructed about the song because he was skilful.
and Berechiah and Elkanah were doorkeepers for the ark.
and Shebaniah and Jehoshaphat and Nethaneel and Amasai and
Zechariah and Benaiah and Eliezer the priests did blow
with the trumpets before the ark of God and Obededom and
Jehiah were doorkeepers for the ark.
so David and the elders of Israel and the captains over
thousands went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the
lord out of the house of Obededom with joy.
and it came to pass when God helped the Levites that bare the
ark of the covenant of the lord that they offered seven
bullocks and seven rams.
and David was clothed with a robe of fine linen and all the
Levites that bare the ark and the singers and Chenaniah the
Master of the song with the singers David also had upon him
an Ephod of linen.
thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the lord
with shouting and with sound of the cornet and with
trumpets and with cymbals making a noise with psalteries and
harps.
and it came to pass as the ark of the covenant of the lord
came to the city of David that Michal the daughter of Saul
looking out at a window saw king David dancing and playing
and she despised him in her heart.
so they brought the ark of God and set it in the midst of the
tent that David had pitched for it and they offered burnt
sacrifices and peace offerings before God.
and when David had made an end of offering the burnt offerings
and the peace offerings he blessed the people in the name of
the lord.
and he dealt to every one of Israel both man and woman to
every one a loaf of bread and a good piece of flesh and a
flagon of wine.
and he appointed certain of the Levites to minister before the
ark of the lord and to record and to thank and praise the
lord God of Israel
Asaph the chief and next to him Zechariah Jeiel and
Shemiramoth and Jehiel and Mattithiah and Eliab and
Benaiah and Obededom and Jeiel with psalteries and with
harps but Asaph made a sound with cymbals
Benaiah also and Jahaziel the priests with trumpets
continually before the ark of the covenant of God.
then on that day David delivered first this psalm to thank the
lord into the hand of Asaph and his brethren.
give thanks unto the lord call upon his name make known his
deeds among the people.
sing unto him sing psalms unto him talk ye of all his
wondrous works.
glory ye in his holy name let the heart of them rejoice that
seek the lord.
seek the lord and his strength seek his face continually.
remember his marvellous works that he hath done his wonders
and the judgments of his mouth
O ye seed of Israel his servant ye children of Jacob his
chosen ones.
he is the lord our God his judgments are in all the earth.
be ye mindful always of his covenant the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations
even of the covenant which he made with Abraham and of his
oath unto Isaac
and hath confirmed the same to Jacob for a law and to Israel
for an everlasting covenant
saying unto thee will I give the land of Canaan the Lot of
your inheritance
when ye were but few even a few and strangers in it.
and when they went from nation to nation and from one kingdom
to another people
he suffered no man to do them wrong yea he reproved kings
for their sakes
saying touch not mine anointed and do my prophets no harm.
sing unto the lord all the earth shew forth from day to day
his salvation.
declare his glory among the heathen his marvellous works
among all nations.
for great is the lord and greatly to be praised he also is
to be feared above all gods.
for all the gods of the people are idols but the lord made
the heavens.
glory and honour are in his presence strength and gladness
are in his place.
give unto the lord ye kindreds of the people give unto the
lord glory and strength.
give unto the lord the glory due unto his name bring an
offering and come before him worship the lord in the beauty
of holiness.
fear before him all the earth the world also shall be
stable that it be not moved.
let the heavens be glad and let the earth rejoice and let
men say among the nations the lord reigneth.
let the sea roar and the fulness thereof let the fields
rejoice and all that is therein.
then shall the trees of the wood sing out at the presence of
the lord because he cometh to judge the earth.
O give thanks unto the lord for he is good for his mercy
endureth for ever.
and say ye save us O God of our salvation and gather us
together and deliver us from the heathen that we may give
thanks to thy holy name and glory in thy praise.
blessed be the lord God of Israel for ever and ever. and all
the people said Amen and praised the lord.
so he left there before the ark of the covenant of the lord
Asaph and his brethren to minister before the ark
continually as every day s work required
and Obededom with their brethren threescore and eight
Obededom also the son of Jeduthun and Hosah to be porters
and Zadok the priest and his brethren the priests before the
tabernacle of the lord in the high place that was at Gibeon
to offer burnt offerings unto the lord upon the altar of the
burnt offering continually morning and evening and to do
according to all that is written in the law of the lord which
he commanded Israel
and with them Heman and Jeduthun and the rest that were
chosen who were expressed by name to give thanks to the
lord because his mercy endureth for ever
and with them Heman and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for
those that should make a sound and with musical instruments
of God. and the sons of Jeduthun were porters.
and all the people departed every man to his house and David
returned to bless his house.
now it came to pass as David sat in his house that David
said to Nathan the prophet lo I dwell in an house of cedars
but the ark of the covenant of the lord remaineth under
curtains.
then Nathan said unto David do all that is in thine heart
for God is with thee.
and it came to pass the same night that the word of God came
to Nathan saying
go and tell David my servant thus saith the lord thou shalt
not build me an house to dwell in
for I have not dwelt in an house since the day that I brought
up Israel unto this day but have gone from tent to tent and
from one tabernacle to another.
wheresoever I have walked with all Israel spake I a word to
any of the judges of Israel whom I commanded to feed my
people saying why have ye not built me an house of cedars?
now therefore thus shalt thou say unto my servant David thus
saith the lord of hosts I took thee from the sheepcote even
from following the sheep that thou shouldest be ruler over my
people Israel
and I have been with thee whithersoever thou hast walked and
have cut off all thine enemies from before thee and have made
thee a name like the name of the great men that are in the
earth.
also I will ordain a place for my people Israel and will
plant them and they shall dwell in their place and shall be
moved no more Neither shall the children of wickedness waste
them any more as at the beginning
and since the time that I commanded judges to be over my
people Israel. moreover I will subdue all thine enemies.
furthermore I tell thee that the lord will build thee an
house.
and it shall come to pass when thy days be expired that thou
must go to be with thy fathers that I will raise up thy seed
after thee which shall be of thy sons and I will establish
his kingdom.
he shall build me an house and I will stablish his throne for
ever.
I will be his father and he shall be my son and I will not
take my mercy away from him as I took it from him that was
before thee
but I will settle him in mine house and in my kingdom for
ever and his throne shall be established for evermore.
according to all these words and according to all this
vision so did Nathan speak unto David.
and David the king came and sat before the lord and said who
Am I O lord God and what is mine house that thou hast
brought me hitherto?
and yet this was a small thing in thine eyes O God for thou
hast also spoken of thy servant s house for a great while to
come and hast regarded me according to the estate of a man of
high degree O lord God.
what can David speak more to thee for the honour of thy
servant? for thou knowest thy servant.
O lord for thy servant s sake and according to thine own
heart hast thou done all this greatness in making known all
these great things.
O lord there is none like thee Neither is there any God
beside thee according to all that we have heard with our
ears.
and what one nation in the earth is like thy people Israel
whom God went to redeem to be his own people to make thee a
name of greatness and terribleness by driving out nations
from before thy people whom thou hast redeemed out of Egypt?
for thy people Israel didst thou make thine own people for
ever and thou lord becamest their God.
therefore now lord let the thing that thou hast spoken
concerning thy servant and concerning his house be established
for ever and do as thou hast said.
let it even be established that thy name may be magnified for
ever saying the lord of hosts is the God of Israel even a
God to Israel and let the house of David thy servant be
established before thee.
for thou O my God hast told thy servant that thou wilt build
him an house therefore thy servant hath found in his heart to
pray before thee.
and now lord thou art God and hast promised this goodness
unto thy servant
now therefore let it please thee to bless the house of thy
servant that it may be before thee for ever for thou
blessest O lord and it shall be blessed for ever.
now after this it came to pass that David smote the
Philistines and subdued them and took Gath and her towns out
of the hand of the Philistines.
and he smote Moab and the Moabites became David s servants
and brought gifts.
and David smote Hadarezer king of Zobah unto Hamath as he
went to stablish his dominion by the river Euphrates.
and David took from him a thousand chariots and seven
thousand horsemen and twenty thousand footmen David also
houghed all the chariot horses but reserved of them an
hundred chariots.
and when the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadarezer king
of Zobah David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand
men.
then David put garrisons in Syriadamascus and the Syrians
became David s servants and brought gifts. thus the lord
preserved David whithersoever he went.
and David took the shields of gold that were on the servants
of Hadarezer and brought them to Jerusalem.
likewise from Tibhath and from Chun cities of Hadarezer
brought David very Much brass wherewith Solomon made the
brasen sea and the pillars and the vessels of brass.
now when Tou king of Hamath heard how David had smitten all
the host of Hadarezer king of Zobah
he sent Hadoram his son to king David to enquire of his
welfare and to congratulate him because he had fought
against Hadarezer and smitten him for Hadarezer had war
with Tou and with him all manner of vessels of gold and
Silver and brass.
them also king David dedicated unto the lord with the Silver
and the gold that he brought from all these nations from
Edom and from Moab and from the children of Ammon and from
the Philistines and from Amalek.
moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah slew of the Edomites in
the valley of salt eighteen thousand.
and he put garrisons in Edom and all the Edomites became
David s servants. thus the lord preserved David whithersoever
he went.
so David reigned over all Israel and executed judgment and
justice among all his people.
and Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host and Jehoshaphat
the son of Ahilud recorder.
and Zadok the son of Ahitub and Abimelech the son of
Abiathar were the priests and Shavsha was scribe
and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and
the Pelethites and the sons of David were chief about the
king.
now it came to pass after this that Nahash the king of the
children of Ammon died and his son reigned in his stead.
and David said I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of
Nahash because his father shewed kindness to me. and David
sent messengers to comfort him concerning his father. so the
servants of David came into the land of the children of Ammon
to Hanun to comfort him.
but the princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanun
thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father that he hath
sent comforters unto thee? are not his servants come unto thee
for to search and to overthrow and to spy out the land?
wherefore Hanun took David s servants and shaved them and
cut off their garments in the midst hard by their buttocks
and sent them away.
then there went certain and told David how the men were
served. and he sent to meet them for the men were greatly
ashamed. and the king said tarry at Jericho until your beards
be grown and then return.
and when the children of Ammon saw that they had made
themselves odious to David Hanun and the children of Ammon
sent a thousand talents of Silver to hire them chariots and
horsemen out of Mesopotamia and out of Syriamaachah and out
of Zobah.
so they hired thirty and two thousand chariots and the king
of Maachah and his people who came and pitched before Medeba.
and the children of Ammon gathered themselves together from
their cities and came to battle.
and when David heard of it he sent Joab and all the host of
the Mighty men.
and the children of Ammon came out and put the battle in
array before the gate of the city and the kings that were
come were by themselves in the field.
now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him before
and behind he chose out of all the choice of Israel and put
them in array against the Syrians.
and the rest of the people he delivered unto the hand of
Abishai his brother and they set themselves in array against
the children of Ammon.
and he said if the Syrians be too strong for me then thou
shalt help me but if the children of Ammon be too strong for
thee then I will help thee.
be of good courage and let us behave ourselves valiantly for
our people and for the cities of our God and let the lord do
that which is good in his sight.
so Joab and the people that were with him drew nigh before the
Syrians unto the battle and they fled before him.
and when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled
they likewise fled before Abishai his brother and entered
into the city. then Joab came to Jerusalem.
and when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse
before Israel they sent messengers and drew forth the
Syrians that were beyond the river and Shophach the captain
of the host of Hadarezer went before them.
and it was told David and he gathered all Israel and passed
over Jordan and came upon them and set the battle in array
against them. so when David had put the battle in array
against the Syrians they fought with him.
but the Syrians fled before Israel and David slew of the
Syrians seven thousand men which fought in chariots and forty
thousand footmen and killed Shophach the captain of the host.
and when the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were put to
the worse before Israel they made peace with David and
became his servants Neither would the Syrians help the
children of Ammon any more.
and it came to pass that after the year was expired at the
time that kings go out to battle Joab led forth the power of
the army and wasted the country of the children of Ammon and
came and besieged Rabbah. but David tarried at Jerusalem. and
Joab smote Rabbah and destroyed it.
and David took the crown of their king from off his head and
found it to weigh a talent of gold and there were precious
stones in it and it was set upon David s head and he brought
also exceeding Much spoil out of the city.
and he brought out the people that were in it and cut them
with saws and with harrows of Iron and with axes. even so
dealt David with all the cities of the children of Ammon. and
David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.
and it came to pass after this that there arose war at Gezer
with the Philistines at which time Sibbechai the Hushathite
slew Sippai that was of the children of the giant and they
were subdued.
and there was war again with the Philistines and Elhanan the
son of Jair slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite
whose spear staff was like a weaver s beam.
and yet again there was war at Gath where was a man of great
stature whose fingers and toes were four and twenty six on
each hand and six on each foot and he also was the son of the
giant.
but when he defied Israel Jonathan the son of Shimea David s
brother slew him.
these were born unto the giant in Gath and they fell by the
hand of David and by the hand of his servants.
and Satan stood up against Israel and provoked David to
number Israel.
and David said to Joab and to the rulers of the people go
number Israel from Beersheba even to Dan and bring the number
of them to me that I may know it.
and Joab answered the lord make his people an hundred times
so many more as they be but my lord the king are they not
all my lord s servants? why then doth my lord require this
thing? why will he be a cause of trespass to Israel?
nevertheless the king s word prevailed against Joab. wherefore
Joab departed and went throughout all Israel and came to
Jerusalem.
and Joab gave the sum of the number of the people unto David.
and all they of Israel were a thousand thousand and an hundred
thousand men that drew sword and Judah was four hundred
threescore and Ten thousand men that drew sword.
but Levi and Benjamin counted he not among them for the
king s word was abominable to Joab.
and God was displeased with this thing therefore he smote
Israel.
and David said unto God I have sinned greatly because I have
done this thing but now I beseech thee do away the iniquity
of thy servant for I have done very foolishly.
and the lord spake unto Gad David s seer saying
go and tell David saying thus saith the lord I offer thee
three things choose thee one of them that I may do it unto
thee.
so Gad came to David and said unto him thus saith the lord
choose thee
either three years famine or three months to be destroyed
before thy foes while that the sword of thine enemies
overtaketh thee or else three days the sword of the lord
even the pestilence in the land and the angel of the lord
destroying throughout all the coasts of Israel. now therefore
advise thyself what word I shall bring again to him that sent
me.
and David said unto Gad I Am in a great strait let me fall
now into the hand of the lord for very great are his mercies
but let me not fall into the hand of man.
so the lord sent pestilence upon Israel and there fell of
Israel seventy thousand men.
and God sent an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it and as he
was destroying the lord beheld and he repented him of the
evil and said to the angel that destroyed it is enough stay
now thine hand. and the angel of the lord stood by the
threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.
and David lifted up his eyes and saw the angel of the lord
stand between the earth and the heaven having a drawn sword
in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. then David and the
elders of Israel who were clothed in sackcloth fell upon
their faces.
and David said unto God is it not I that commanded the people
to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned and done evil
indeed but as for these sheep what have they done? let thine
hand I pray thee O lord my God be on me and on my father s
house but not on thy people that they should be plagued.
then the angel of the lord commanded Gad to say to David that
David should go up and set up an altar unto the lord in the
threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.
and David went up at the saying of Gad which he spake in the
name of the lord.
and Ornan turned back and saw the angel and his four sons
with him hid themselves. now Ornan was threshing wheat.
and as David came to Ornan Ornan looked and saw David and
went out of the threshingfloor and bowed himself to David
with his face to the ground.
then David said to Ornan grant me the place of this
threshingfloor that I may build an altar therein unto the
lord thou shalt grant it me for the full price that the
plague may be stayed from the people.
and Ornan said unto David take it to thee and let my lord
the king do that which is good in his eyes lo I give thee
the oxen also for burnt offerings and the threshing
instruments for wood and the wheat for the meat offering I
give it all.
and king David said to Ornan nay but I will verily buy it
for the full price for I will not take that which is thine
for the lord nor offer burnt offerings without cost.
so David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred shekels of
gold by weight.
and David built there an altar unto the lord and offered
burnt offerings and peace offerings and called upon the lord
and he answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of
burnt offering.
and the lord commanded the angel and he put up his sword
again into the sheath thereof.
at that time when David saw that the lord had answered him in
the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite then he sacrificed
there.
for the tabernacle of the lord which Moses made in the
wilderness and the altar of the burnt offering were at that
season in the high place at Gibeon.
but David could not go before it to enquire of God for he was
afraid because of the sword of the angel of the lord.
then David said this is the house of the lord God and this
is the altar of the burnt offering for Israel.
and David commanded to gather together the strangers that were
in the land of Israel and he set masons to Hew wrought stones
to build the house of God.
and David prepared Iron in abundance for the nails for the
doors of the gates and for the joinings and brass in
abundance without weight
also cedar trees in abundance for the Zidonians and they of
Tyre brought Much cedar wood to David.
and David said Solomon my son is young and tender and the
house that is to be builded for the lord must be exceeding
magnifical of fame and of glory throughout all countries I
will therefore now make preparation for it. so David prepared
abundantly before his death.
then he called for Solomon his son and charged him to build
an house for the lord God of Israel.
and David said to Solomon my son as for me it was in my
mind to build an house unto the name of the lord my God
but the word of the lord came to me saying thou hast shed
blood abundantly and hast made great wars thou shalt not
build an house unto my name because thou hast shed Much blood
upon the earth in my sight.
behold a son shall be born to thee who shall be a man of
rest and I will give him rest from all his enemies round
about for his name shall be Solomon and I will give peace
and quietness unto Israel in his days.
he shall build an house for my name and he shall be my son
and I will be his father and I will establish the throne of
his kingdom over Israel for ever.
now my son the lord be with thee and prosper thou and
build the house of the lord thy God as he hath said of thee.
only the lord give thee wisdom and understanding and give
thee charge concerning Israel that thou mayest keep the law
of the lord thy God.
then shalt thou prosper if thou takest heed to fulfil the
statutes and judgments which the lord charged Moses with
concerning Israel be strong and of good courage dread not
nor be dismayed.
now behold in my trouble I have prepared for the house of
the lord an hundred thousand talents of gold and a thousand
thousand talents of Silver and of brass and Iron without
weight for it is in abundance timber also and stone have I
prepared and thou mayest add thereto.
moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance hewers and
workers of stone and timber and all manner of cunning men for
every manner of work.
of the gold the Silver and the brass and the Iron there is
no number. Arise therefore and be doing and the lord be with
thee.
David also commanded all the princes of Israel to help Solomon
his son saying
is not the lord your God with you? and hath he not given you
rest on every side? for he hath given the inhabitants of the
land into mine hand and the land is subdued before the lord
and before his people.
now set your heart and your soul to seek the lord your God
Arise therefore and build ye the sanctuary of the lord God
to bring the ark of the covenant of the lord and the holy
vessels of God into the house that is to be built to the name
of the lord.
so when David was old and full of days he made Solomon his
son king over Israel.
and he gathered together all the princes of Israel with the
priests and the Levites.
now the Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years and
upward and their number by their polls man by man was
thirty and eight thousand.
of which twenty and four thousand were to set forward the
work of the house of the lord and six thousand were officers
and judges
moreover four thousand were porters and four thousand praised
the lord with the instruments which I made said David to
praise therewith.
and David divided them into courses among the sons of Levi
namely Gershon Kohath and Merari.
of the Gershonites were Laadan and Shimei.
the sons of Laadan the chief was Jehiel and Zetham and
Joel three.
the sons of Shimei Shelomith and Haziel and Haran three.
these were the chief of the fathers of Laadan.
and the sons of Shimei were Jahath Zina and Jeush and
Beriah. these four were the sons of Shimei.
and Jahath was the chief and Zizah the second but Jeush and
Beriah had not many sons therefore they were in one
reckoning according to their father s house.
the sons of Kohath Amram Izhar Hebron and Uzziel four.
the sons of Amram Aaron and Moses and Aaron was separated
that he should sanctify the most holy things he and his sons
for ever to burn incense before the lord to minister unto
him and to bless in his name for ever.
now concerning Moses the man of God his sons were named of
the tribe of Levi.
the sons of Moses were Gershom and Eliezer.
of the sons of Gershom Shebuel was the chief.
and the sons of Eliezer were Rehabiah the chief. and Eliezer
had none other sons but the sons of Rehabiah were very many.
of the sons of Izhar Shelomith the chief.
of the sons of Hebron Jeriah the first Amariah the second
Jahaziel the third and Jekameam the fourth.
of the sons of Uzziel Micah the first and Jesiah the second.
the sons of Merari Mahli and Mushi. the sons of Mahli
Eleazar and Kish.
and Eleazar died and had no sons but daughters and their
brethren the sons of Kish took them.
the sons of Mushi Mahli and Eder and Jeremoth three.
these were the sons of Levi after the house of their fathers
even the chief of the fathers as they were counted by number
of names by their polls that did the work for the service of
the house of the lord from the age of twenty years and
upward.
for David said the lord God of Israel hath given rest unto
his people that they may dwell in Jerusalem for ever
and also unto the Levites they shall no more carry the
tabernacle nor any vessels of it for the service thereof.
for by the last words of David the Levites were numbered from
twenty years old and above
because their office was to wait on the sons of Aaron for the
service of the house of the lord in the courts and in the
chambers and in the purifying of all holy things and the
work of the service of the house of God
both for the shewbread and for the fine flour for meat
offering and for the unleavened cakes and for that which is
baked in the pan and for that which is fried and for all
manner of measure and size
and to stand every morning to thank and praise the lord and
likewise at even
and to offer all burnt sacrifices unto the lord in the
sabbaths in the new moons and on the set feasts by number
according to the order commanded unto them continually before
the lord
and that they should keep the charge of the tabernacle of the
congregation and the charge of the holy place and the charge
of the sons of Aaron their brethren in the service of the
house of the lord.
now these are the divisions of the sons of Aaron. the sons of
Aaron Nadab and Abihu Eleazar and Ithamar.
but Nadab and Abihu died before their father and had no
children therefore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the priest s
office.
and David distributed them both Zadok of the sons of Eleazar
and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar according to their
offices in their service.
and there were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar
than of the sons of Ithamar and thus were they divided. among
the sons of Eleazar there were sixteen chief men of the house
of their fathers and eight among the sons of Ithamar
according to the house of their fathers.
thus were they divided by Lot one sort with another for the
governors of the sanctuary and governors of the house of God
were of the sons of Eleazar and of the sons of Ithamar.
and Shemaiah the son of Nethaneel the scribe one of the
Levites wrote them before the king and the princes and
Zadok the priest and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar and
before the chief of the fathers of the priests and Levites
one principal household being taken for Eleazar and one taken
for Ithamar.
now the first Lot came forth to Jehoiarib the second to
Jedaiah
the third to Harim the fourth to Seorim
the fifth to Malchijah the sixth to Mijamin
the seventh to Hakkoz the eighth to Abijah
the ninth to Jeshuah the tenth to Shecaniah
the eleventh to Eliashib the twelfth to Jakim
the thirteenth to Huppah the fourteenth to Jeshebeab
the fifteenth to Bilgah the sixteenth to Immer
the seventeenth to Hezir the eighteenth to Aphses
the nineteenth to Pethahiah the twentieth to Jehezekel
the one and twentieth to Jachin the two and twentieth to
Gamul
the three and twentieth to Delaiah the four and twentieth to
Maaziah.
these were the orderings of them in their service to come into
the house of the lord according to their manner under Aaron
their father as the lord God of Israel had commanded him.
and the rest of the sons of Levi were these of the sons of
Amram Shubael of the sons of Shubael Jehdeiah.
concerning Rehabiah of the sons of Rehabiah the first was
Isshiah.
of the Izharites Shelomoth of the sons of Shelomoth Jahath.
and the sons of Hebron Jeriah the first Amariah the second
Jahaziel the third Jekameam the fourth.
of the sons of Uzziel Michah of the sons of Michah Shamir.
the brother of Michah was Isshiah of the sons of Isshiah
Zechariah.
the sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi the sons of Jaaziah
Beno.
the sons of Merari by Jaaziah Beno and Shoham and Zaccur
and Ibri.
of Mahli came Eleazar who had no sons.
concerning Kish the son of Kish was Jerahmeel.
the sons also of Mushi Mahli and Eder and Jerimoth. these
were the sons of the Levites after the house of their fathers.
these likewise cast lots over against their brethren the sons
of Aaron in the presence of David the king and Zadok and
Ahimelech and the chief of the fathers of the priests and
Levites even the principal fathers over against their younger
brethren.
moreover David and the captains of the host separated to the
service of the sons of Asaph and of Heman and of Jeduthun
who should prophesy with harps with psalteries and with
cymbals and the number of the workmen according to their
service was
of the sons of Asaph Zaccur and Joseph and Nethaniah and
Asarelah the sons of Asaph under the hands of Asaph which
prophesied according to the order of the king.
of Jeduthun the sons of Jeduthun Gedaliah and Zeri and
Jeshaiah Hashabiah and Mattithiah six under the hands of
their father Jeduthun who prophesied with a harp to give
thanks and to praise the lord.
of Heman the sons of Heman Bukkiah Mattaniah Uzziel
Shebuel and Jerimoth Hananiah Hanani Eliathah Giddalti
and Romamtiezer Joshbekashah Mallothi Hothir and
Mahazioth
all these were the sons of Heman the king s seer in the words
of God to lift up the horn. and God gave to Heman fourteen
sons and three daughters.
all these were under the hands of their father for song in the
house of the lord with cymbals psalteries and harps for
the service of the house of God according to the king s order
to Asaph Jeduthun and Heman.
so the number of them with their brethren that were
instructed in the songs of the lord even all that were
cunning was two hundred fourscore and eight.
and they cast lots ward against ward as well the small as
the great the teacher as the scholar.
now the first Lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph the second
to Gedaliah who with his brethren and sons were twelve
the third to Zaccur he his sons and his brethren were
twelve
the fourth to Izri he his sons and his brethren were
twelve
the fifth to Nethaniah he his sons and his brethren were
twelve
the sixth to Bukkiah he his sons and his brethren were
twelve
the seventh to Jesharelah he his sons and his brethren
were twelve
the eighth to Jeshaiah he his sons and his brethren were
twelve
the ninth to Mattaniah he his sons and his brethren were
twelve
the tenth to Shimei he his sons and his brethren were
twelve
the eleventh to Azareel he his sons and his brethren were
twelve
the twelfth to Hashabiah he his sons and his brethren were
twelve
the thirteenth to Shubael he his sons and his brethren
were twelve
the fourteenth to Mattithiah he his sons and his brethren
were twelve
the fifteenth to Jeremoth he his sons and his brethren
were twelve
the sixteenth to Hananiah he his sons and his brethren
were twelve
the seventeenth to Joshbekashah he his sons and his
brethren were twelve
the eighteenth to Hanani he his sons and his brethren were
twelve
the nineteenth to Mallothi he his sons and his brethren
were twelve
the twentieth to Eliathah he his sons and his brethren
were twelve
the one and twentieth to Hothir he his sons and his
brethren were twelve
the two and twentieth to Giddalti he his sons and his
brethren were twelve
the three and twentieth to Mahazioth he his sons and his
brethren were twelve
the four and twentieth to Romamtiezer he his sons and his
brethren were twelve.
concerning the divisions of the porters of the Korhites was
Meshelemiah the son of Kore of the sons of Asaph.
and the sons of Meshelemiah were Zechariah the firstborn
Jediael the second Zebadiah the third Jathniel the fourth
Elam the fifth Jehohanan the sixth Elioenai the seventh.
moreover the sons of Obededom were Shemaiah the firstborn
Jehozabad the second Joah the third and Sacar the fourth
and Nethaneel the fifth.
Ammiel the sixth Issachar the seventh Peulthai the eighth
for God blessed him.
also unto Shemaiah his son were sons born that ruled
throughout the house of their father for they were Mighty men
of valour.
the sons of Shemaiah Othni and Rephael and Obed Elzabad
whose brethren were strong men Elihu and Semachiah.
all these of the sons of Obededom they and their sons and
their brethren able men for strength for the service were
threescore and two of Obededom.
and Meshelemiah had sons and brethren strong men eighteen.
also Hosah of the children of Merari had sons Simri the
chief for though he was not the firstborn yet his father
made him the chief
Hilkiah the second Tebaliah the third Zechariah the fourth
all the sons and brethren of Hosah were thirteen.
among these were the divisions of the porters even among the
chief men having wards one against another to minister in
the house of the lord.
and they cast lots as well the small as the great according
to the house of their fathers for every gate.
and the Lot eastward fell to Shelemiah. then for Zechariah his
son a wise counsellor they cast lots and his Lot came out
northward.
to Obededom southward and to his sons the house of Asuppim.
to Shuppim and Hosah the Lot came forth westward with the
gate Shallecheth by the causeway of the going up ward
against ward.
eastward were six Levites northward four a day southward
four a day and toward Asuppim two and two.
at Parbar westward four at the causeway and two at Parbar.
these are the divisions of the porters among the sons of Kore
and among the sons of Merari.
and of the Levites Ahijah was over the treasures of the house
of God and over the treasures of the dedicated things.
as concerning the sons of Laadan the sons of the Gershonite
Laadan chief fathers even of Laadan the Gershonite were
Jehieli.
the sons of Jehieli Zetham and Joel his brother which were
over the treasures of the house of the lord.
of the Amramites and the Izharites the Hebronites and the
Uzzielites
and Shebuel the son of Gershom the son of Moses was ruler of
the treasures.
and his brethren by Eliezer Rehabiah his son and Jeshaiah
his son and Joram his son and Zichri his son and Shelomith
his son.
which Shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures
of the dedicated things which David the king and the chief
fathers the captains over thousands and hundreds and the
captains of the host had dedicated.
out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain
the house of the lord.
and all that Samuel the seer and Saul the son of Kish and
Abner the son of Ner and Joab the son of Zeruiah had
dedicated and whosoever had dedicated any thing it was under
the hand of Shelomith and of his brethren.
of the Izharites Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward
business over Israel for officers and judges.
and of the Hebronites Hashabiah and his brethren men of
valour a thousand and seven hundred were officers among them
of Israel on this side Jordan westward in all the business of
the lord and in the service of the king.
among the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief even among the
Hebronites according to the generations of his fathers. in
the fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for
and there were found among them Mighty men of valour at Jazer
of Gilead.
and his brethren men of valour were two thousand and seven
hundred chief fathers whom king David made rulers over the
Reubenites the Gadites and the half tribe of Manasseh for
every matter pertaining to God and affairs of the king.
now the children of Israel after their number to wit the
chief fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds and
their officers that served the king in any matter of the
courses which came in and went out month by month throughout
all the months of the year of every course were twenty and
four thousand.
over the first course for the first month was Jashobeam the
son of Zabdiel and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.
of the children of Perez was the chief of all the captains of
the host for the first month.
and over the course of the second month was Dodai an Ahohite
and of his course was Mikloth also the ruler in his course
likewise were twenty and four thousand.
the third captain of the host for the third month was Benaiah
the son of Jehoiada a chief priest and in his course were
twenty and four thousand.
this is that Benaiah who was Mighty among the thirty and
above the thirty and in his course was Ammizabad his son.
the fourth captain for the fourth month was Asahel the brother
of Joab and Zebadiah his son after him and in his course
were twenty and four thousand.
the fifth captain for the fifth month was Shamhuth the
Izrahite and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
the sixth captain for the sixth month was Ira the son of
Ikkesh the Tekoite and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.
the seventh captain for the seventh month was Helez the
Pelonite of the children of Ephraim and in his course were
twenty and four thousand.
the eighth captain for the eighth month was Sibbecai the
Hushathite of the Zarhites and in his course were twenty and
four thousand.
the ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the
Anetothite of the Benjamites and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.
the tenth captain for the tenth month was Maharai the
Netophathite of the Zarhites and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.
the eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah the
Pirathonite of the children of Ephraim and in his course
were twenty and four thousand.
the twelfth captain for the twelfth month was Heldai the
Netophathite of Othniel and in his course were twenty and
four thousand.
furthermore over the tribes of Israel the ruler of the
Reubenites was Eliezer the son of Zichri of the Simeonites
Shephatiah the son of Maachah
of the Levites Hashabiah the son of Kemuel of the Aaronites
Zadok
of Judah Elihu one of the brethren of David of Issachar
Omri the son of Michael
of Zebulun Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah of Naphtali Jerimoth
the son of Azriel
of the children of Ephraim Hoshea the son of Azaziah of the
half tribe of Manasseh Joel the son of Pedaiah
of the half tribe of Manasseh in Gilead Iddo the son of
Zechariah of Benjamin Jaasiel the son of Abner
of Dan Azareel the son of Jeroham. these were the princes of
the tribes of Israel.
but David took not the number of them from twenty years old
and under because the lord had said he would increase Israel
like to the stars of the heavens.
Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number but he finished not
because there fell wrath for it against Israel Neither was
the number put in the account of the chronicles of king David.
and over the king s treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel
and over the storehouses in the fields in the cities and in
the villages and in the castles was Jehonathan the son of
Uzziah
and over them that did the work of the field for tillage of
the ground was Ezri the son of Chelub
and over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite over the
increase of the vineyards for the wine cellars was Zabdi the
Shiphmite
and over the olive trees and the sycomore trees that were in
the low plains was Baalhanan the Gederite and over the
cellars of oil was Joash
and over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shitrai the
Sharonite and over the herds that were in the valleys was
Shaphat the son of Adlai
over the camels also was Obil the Ishmaelite and over the
asses was Jehdeiah the Meronothite
and over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagerite. all these were the
rulers of the substance which was king David s.
also Jonathan David s uncle was a counsellor a wise man and
a scribe and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king s
sons
and Ahithophel was the king s counsellor and Hushai the
Archite was the king s companion
and after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah and
Abiathar and the general of the king s army was Joab.
and David assembled all the princes of Israel the princes of
the tribes and the captains of the companies that ministered
to the king by course and the captains over the thousands
and captains over the hundreds and the stewards over all the
substance and possession of the king and of his sons with
the officers and with the Mighty men and with all the
valiant men unto Jerusalem.
then David the king stood up upon his feet and said hear me
my brethren and my people as for me I had in mine heart to
build an house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the
lord and for the footstool of our God and had made ready for
the building
but God said unto me thou shalt not build an house for my
name because thou hast been a man of war and hast shed
blood.
howbeit the lord God of Israel chose me before all the house
of my father to be king over Israel for ever for he hath
chosen Judah to be the ruler and of the house of Judah the
house of my father and among the sons of my father he liked
me to make me king over all Israel
and of all my sons for the lord hath given me many sons he
hath chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the
kingdom of the lord over Israel.
and he said unto me Solomon thy son he shall build my house
and my courts for I have chosen him to be my son and I will
be his father.
moreover I will establish his kingdom for ever if he be
constant to do my commandments and my judgments as at this
day.
now therefore in the sight of all Israel the congregation of
the lord and in the audience of our God keep and seek for
all the commandments of the lord your God that ye may possess
this good land and leave it for an inheritance for your
children after you for ever.
and thou Solomon my son know thou the God of thy father and
serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind for
the lord searcheth all hearts and understandeth all the
imaginations of the thoughts if thou seek him he will be
found of thee but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off
for ever.
take heed now for the lord hath chosen thee to build an house
for the sanctuary be strong and do it.
then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch
and of the houses thereof and of the treasuries thereof and
of the upper chambers thereof and of the inner parlours
thereof and of the place of the mercy seat
and the pattern of all that he had by the spirit of the
courts of the house of the lord and of all the chambers round
about of the treasuries of the house of God and of the
treasuries of the dedicated things
also for the courses of the priests and the Levites and for
all the work of the service of the house of the lord and for
all the vessels of service in the house of the lord.
he gave of gold by weight for things of gold for all
instruments of all manner of service Silver also for all
instruments of Silver by weight for all instruments of every
kind of service
even the weight for the candlesticks of gold and for their
lamps of gold by weight for every candlestick and for the
lamps thereof and for the candlesticks of Silver by weight
both for the candlestick and also for the lamps thereof
according to the use of every candlestick.
and by weight he gave gold for the tables of shewbread for
every table and likewise Silver for the tables of Silver
also pure gold for the fleshhooks and the bowls and the
cups and for the golden basons he gave gold by weight for
every bason and likewise Silver by weight for every bason of
Silver
and for the altar of incense refined gold by weight and gold
for the pattern of the chariot of the Cherubims that spread
out their wings and covered the ark of the covenant of the
lord.
all this said David the lord made me understand in writing
by his hand upon me even all the works of this pattern.
and David said to Solomon his son be strong and of good
courage and do it fear not nor be dismayed for the lord
God even my God will be with thee he will not fail thee
nor forsake thee until thou hast finished all the work for
the service of the house of the lord.
and behold the courses of the priests and the Levites even
they shall be with thee for all the service of the house of
God and there shall be with thee for all manner of
workmanship every willing skilful man for any manner of
service also the princes and all the people will be wholly at
thy commandment.
furthermore David the king said unto all the congregation
Solomon my son whom alone God hath chosen is yet young and
tender and the work is great for the palace is not for man
but for the lord God.
now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my God
the gold for things to be made of gold and the Silver for
things of Silver and the brass for things of brass the Iron
for things of Iron and wood for things of wood Onyx stones
and stones to be set glistering stones and of divers
colours and all manner of precious stones and marble stones
in abundance.
moreover because I have set my affection to the house of my
God I have of mine own proper good of gold and Silver which
I have given to the house of my God over and above all that I
have prepared for the holy house.
even three thousand talents of gold of the gold of Ophir and
seven thousand talents of refined Silver to overlay the walls
of the houses withal
the gold for things of gold and the Silver for things of
Silver and for all manner of work to be made by the hands of
artificers. and who then is willing to consecrate his service
this day unto the lord?
then the chief of the fathers and princes of the tribes of
Israel and the captains of thousands and of hundreds with the
rulers of the king s work offered willingly
and gave for the service of the house of God of gold five
thousand talents and Ten thousand drams and of Silver Ten
thousand talents and of brass eighteen thousand talents and
one hundred thousand talents of Iron.
and they with whom precious stones were found gave them to the
treasure of the house of the lord by the hand of Jehiel the
Gershonite.
then the people rejoiced for that they offered willingly
because with perfect heart they offered willingly to the lord
and David the king also rejoiced with great joy.
wherefore David blessed the lord before all the congregation
and David said blessed be thou lord God of Israel our
father for ever and ever.
thine O lord is the greatness and the power and the glory
and the victory and the majesty for all that is in the
heaven and in the earth is thine thine is the kingdom O
lord and thou art exalted as head above all.
both Riches and honour come of thee and thou reignest over
all and in thine hand is power and might and in thine hand
it is to make great and to give strength unto all.
now therefore our God we thank thee and praise thy glorious
name.
but who Am I and what is my people that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of
thee and of thine own have we given thee.
for we are strangers before thee and sojourners as were all
our fathers our days on the earth are as a shadow and there
is none abiding.
O lord our God all this store that we have prepared to build
thee an house for thine holy name cometh of thine hand and is
all thine own.
I know also my God that thou triest the heart and hast
pleasure in uprightness. as for me in the uprightness of mine
heart I have willingly offered all these things and now have
I seen with joy thy people which are present here to offer
willingly unto thee.
O lord God of Abraham Isaac and of Israel our fathers keep
this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart
of thy people and prepare their heart unto thee
and give unto Solomon my son a perfect heart to keep thy
commandments thy testimonies and thy statutes and to do all
these things and to build the palace for the which I have
made provision.
and David said to all the congregation now bless the lord
your God. and all the congregation blessed the lord God of
their fathers and bowed down their heads and worshipped the
lord and the king.
and they sacrificed sacrifices unto the lord and offered
burnt offerings unto the lord on the morrow after that day
even a thousand bullocks a thousand rams and a thousand
lambs with their drink offerings and sacrifices in abundance
for all Israel
and did eat and drink before the lord on that day with great
gladness. and they made Solomon the son of David king the
second time and anointed him unto the lord to be the chief
Governor and Zadok to be priest.
then Solomon sat on the throne of the lord as king instead of
David his father and prospered and all Israel obeyed him.
and all the princes and the Mighty men and all the sons
likewise of king David submitted themselves unto Solomon the
king.
and the lord magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all
Israel and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not
been on any king before him in Israel.
thus David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.
and the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years
seven years reigned he in Hebron and thirty and three years
reigned he in Jerusalem.
and he died in a good old age full of days Riches and
honour and Solomon his son reigned in his stead.
now the acts of David the king first and last behold they
are written in the book of Samuel the seer and in the book of
Nathan the prophet and in the book of Gad the seer
with all his reign and his might and the times that went over
him and over Israel and over all the kingdoms of the
countries.
and Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom
and the lord his God was with him and magnified him
exceedingly.
then Solomon spake unto all Israel to the captains of
thousands and of hundreds and to the judges and to every
Governor in all Israel the chief of the fathers.
so Solomon and all the congregation with him went to the
high place that was at Gibeon for there was the tabernacle of
the congregation of God which Moses the servant of the lord
had made in the wilderness.
but the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjathjearim to
the place which David had prepared for it for he had pitched
a tent for it at Jerusalem.
moreover the brasen altar that Bezaleel the son of Uri the
son of Hur had made he put before the tabernacle of the
lord and Solomon and the congregation sought unto it.
and Solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the
lord which was at the tabernacle of the congregation and
offered a thousand burnt offerings upon it.
in that night did God appear unto Solomon and said unto him
ask what I shall give thee.
and Solomon said unto God thou hast shewed great mercy unto
David my father and hast made me to reign in his stead.
now O lord God let thy promise unto David my father be
established for thou hast made me king over a people like the
dust of the earth in multitude.
give me now wisdom and knowledge that I may go out and come
in before this people for who can judge this thy people that
is so great?
and God said to Solomon because this was in thine heart and
thou hast not asked Riches wealth or honour nor the life of
thine enemies Neither yet hast asked long life but hast
asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself that thou mayest judge
my people over whom I have made thee king
wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee and I will give
thee Riches and wealth and honour such as none of the kings
have had that have been before thee Neither shall there any
after thee have the like.
then Solomon came from his journey to the high place that was
at Gibeon to Jerusalem from before the tabernacle of the
congregation and reigned over Israel.
and Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen and he had a
thousand and four hundred chariots and twelve thousand
horsemen which he placed in the chariot cities and with the
king at Jerusalem.
and the king made Silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as
stones and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that are
in the vale for abundance.
and Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt and linen yarn
the king s merchants received the linen yarn at a price.
and they fetched up and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot
for six hundred shekels of Silver and an horse for an hundred
and fifty and so brought they out horses for all the kings of
the Hittites and for the kings of Syria by their means.
and Solomon determined to build an house for the name of the
lord and an house for his kingdom.
and Solomon told out threescore and Ten thousand men to bear
burdens and fourscore thousand to Hew in the mountain and
three thousand and six hundred to oversee them.
and Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre saying as thou
didst deal with David my father and didst send him cedars to
build him an house to dwell therein even so deal with me.
behold I build an house to the name of the lord my God to
dedicate it to him and to burn before him sweet incense and
for the continual shewbread and for the burnt offerings
morning and evening on the sabbaths and on the new moons
and on the solemn feasts of the lord our God. this is an
ordinance for ever to Israel.
and the house which I build is great for great is our God
above all gods.
but who is able to build him an house seeing the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who Am I then that I
should build him an house save only to burn sacrifice before
him?
send me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold and in
Silver and in brass and in Iron and in purple and crimson
and blue and that can skill to grave with the cunning men
that are with me in Judah and in Jerusalem whom David my
father did provide.
send me also cedar trees fir trees and algum trees out of
Lebanon for I know that thy servants can skill to cut timber
in Lebanon and behold my servants shall be with thy
servants
even to prepare me timber in abundance for the house which I
Am about to build shall be wonderful great.
and behold I will give to thy servants the hewers that cut
timber twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat and twenty
thousand measures of barley and twenty thousand baths of
wine and twenty thousand baths of oil.
then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing which he sent
to Solomon because the lord hath loved his people he hath
made thee king over them.
Huram said moreover blessed be the lord God of Israel that
made heaven and earth who hath given to David the king a wise
son endued with prudence and understanding that might build
an house for the lord and an house for his kingdom.
and now I have sent a cunning man endued with understanding
of Huram my father s
the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan and his father was
a man of Tyre skilful to work in gold and in Silver in
brass in Iron in stone and in timber in purple in blue
and in fine linen and in crimson also to grave any manner of
graving and to find out every device which shall be put to
him with thy cunning men and with the cunning men of my lord
David thy father.
now therefore the wheat and the barley the oil and the
wine which my lord hath spoken of let him send unto his
servants
and we will cut wood out of Lebanon as Much as thou shalt
need and we will bring it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa
and thou shalt carry it up to Jerusalem.
and Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land
of Israel after the numbering wherewith David his father had
numbered them and they were found an hundred and fifty
thousand and three thousand and six hundred.
and he set threescore and Ten thousand of them to be bearers
of burdens and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the
mountain and three thousand and six hundred overseers to set
the people a work.
then Solomon began to build the house of the lord at Jerusalem
in mount Moriah where the lord appeared unto David his
father in the place that David had prepared in the
threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.
and he began to build in the second day of the second month
in the fourth year of his reign.
now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for
the building of the house of God. the length by cubits after
the first measure was threescore cubits and the breadth
twenty cubits.
and the porch that was in the front of the house the length
of it was according to the breadth of the house twenty
cubits and the height was an hundred and twenty and he
overlaid it within with pure gold.
and the greater house he cieled with fir tree which he
overlaid with fine gold and set thereon palm trees and
chains.
and he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty
and the gold was gold of Parvaim.
he overlaid also the house the beams the posts and the
walls thereof and the doors thereof with gold and graved
Cherubims on the walls.
and he made the most holy house the length whereof was
according to the breadth of the house twenty cubits and the
breadth thereof twenty cubits and he overlaid it with fine
gold amounting to six hundred talents.
and the weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. and he
overlaid the upper chambers with gold.
and in the most holy house he made two Cherubims of image
work and overlaid them with gold.
and the wings of the Cherubims were twenty cubits long one
wing of the one Cherub was five cubits reaching to the wall
of the house and the other wing was likewise five cubits
reaching to the wing of the other Cherub.
and one wing of the other Cherub was five cubits reaching to
the wall of the house and the other wing was five cubits
also joining to the wing of the other Cherub.
the wings of these Cherubims spread themselves forth twenty
cubits and they stood on their feet and their faces were
inward.
and he made the vail of blue and purple and crimson and
fine linen and wrought Cherubims thereon.
also he made before the house two pillars of thirty and five
cubits high and the chapiter that was on the top of each of
them was five cubits.
and he made chains as in the oracle and put them on the
heads of the pillars and made an hundred pomegranates and
put them on the chains.
and he reared up the pillars before the temple one on the
right hand and the other on the left and called the name of
that on the right hand Jachin and the name of that on the
left Boaz.
moreover he made an altar of brass twenty cubits the length
thereof and twenty cubits the breadth thereof and Ten cubits
the height thereof.
also he made a molten sea of Ten cubits from brim to brim
round in compass and five cubits the height thereof and a
line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.
and under it was the similitude of oxen which did compass it
round about Ten in a cubit compassing the sea round about.
two rows of oxen were cast when it was cast.
it stood upon twelve oxen three looking toward the north and
three looking toward the west and three looking toward the
south and three looking toward the east and the sea was set
above upon them and all their hinder parts were inward.
and the thickness of it was an handbreadth and the brim of it
like the work of the brim of a cup with flowers of lilies
and it received and held three thousand baths.
he made also Ten lavers and put five on the right hand and
five on the left to wash in them such things as they offered
for the burnt offering they washed in them but the sea was
for the priests to wash in.
and he made Ten candlesticks of gold according to their form
and set them in the temple five on the right hand and five
on the left.
he made also Ten tables and placed them in the temple five
on the right side and five on the left. and he made an
hundred basons of gold.
furthermore he made the court of the priests and the great
court and doors for the court and overlaid the doors of them
with brass.
and he set the sea on the right side of the east end over
against the south.
and Huram made the pots and the shovels and the basons. and
Huram finished the work that he was to make for king Solomon
for the house of God
to wit the two pillars and the pommels and the chapiters
which were on the top of the two pillars and the two wreaths
to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were on the
top of the pillars
and four hundred pomegranates on the two wreaths two rows of
pomegranates on each wreath to cover the two pommels of the
chapiters which were upon the pillars.
he made also bases and lavers made he upon the bases
one sea and twelve oxen under it.
the pots also and the shovels and the fleshhooks and all
their instruments did Huram his father make to king Solomon
for the house of the lord of bright brass.
in the plain of Jordan did the king cast them in the clay
ground between Succoth and Zeredathah.
thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance for
the weight of the brass could not be found out.
and Solomon made all the vessels that were for the house of
God the golden altar also and the tables whereon the
shewbread was set
moreover the candlesticks with their lamps that they should
burn after the manner before the oracle of pure gold
and the flowers and the lamps and the tongs made he of
gold and that perfect gold
and the snuffers and the basons and the spoons and the
censers of pure gold and the entry of the house the inner
doors thereof for the most holy place and the doors of the
house of the temple were of gold.
thus all the work that Solomon made for the house of the lord
was finished and Solomon brought in all the things that David
his father had dedicated and the Silver and the gold and
all the instruments put he among the treasures of the house
of God.
then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the heads
of the tribes the chief of the fathers of the children of
Israel unto Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the covenant of
the lord out of the city of David which is Zion.
wherefore all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto the
king in the feast which was in the seventh month.
and all the elders of Israel came and the Levites took up the
ark.
and they brought up the ark and the tabernacle of the
congregation and all the holy vessels that were in the
tabernacle these did the priests and the Levites bring up.
also king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel that
were assembled unto him before the ark sacrificed sheep and
oxen which could not be told nor numbered for multitude.
and the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the lord
unto his place to the oracle of the house into the most holy
place even under the wings of the Cherubims
for the Cherubims spread forth their wings over the place of
the ark and the Cherubims covered the ark and the staves
thereof above.
and they drew out the staves of the ark that the ends of the
staves were seen from the ark before the oracle but they were
not seen without. and there it is unto this day.
there was nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses
put therein at Horeb when the lord made a covenant with the
children of Israel when they came out of Egypt.
and it came to pass when the priests were come out of the
holy place for all the priests that were present were
sanctified and did not then wait by course
also the Levites which were the singers all of them of Asaph
of Heman of Jeduthun with their sons and their brethren
being arrayed in white linen having cymbals and psalteries
and harps stood at the east end of the altar and with them
an hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets
it came even to pass as the trumpeters and singers were as
one to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking
the lord and when they lifted up their voice with the
trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick and praised
the lord saying for he is good for his mercy endureth for
ever that then the house was filled with a cloud even the
house of the lord
so that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of
the cloud for the glory of the lord had filled the house of
God.
then said Solomon the lord hath said that he would dwell in
the thick darkness.
but I have built an house of habitation for thee and a place
for thy dwelling for ever.
and the king turned his face and blessed the whole
congregation of Israel and all the congregation of Israel
stood.
and he said blessed be the lord God of Israel who hath with
his hands fulfilled that which he spake with his mouth to my
father David saying
since the day that I brought forth my people out of the land
of Egypt I chose no city among all the tribes of Israel to
build an house in that my name might be there Neither chose
I any man to be a ruler over my people Israel
but I have chosen Jerusalem that my name might be there and
have chosen David to be over my people Israel.
now it was in the heart of David my father to build an house
for the name of the lord God of Israel.
but the lord said to David my father forasmuch as it was in
thine heart to build an house for my name thou didst well in
that it was in thine heart
notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house but thy son
which shall come forth out of thy loins he shall build the
house for my name.
the lord therefore hath performed his word that he hath
spoken for I Am risen up in the room of David my father and
Am set on the throne of Israel as the lord promised and have
built the house for the name of the lord God of Israel.
and in it have I put the ark wherein is the covenant of the
lord that he made with the children of Israel.
and he stood before the altar of the lord in the presence of
all the congregation of Israel and spread forth his hands
for Solomon had made a brasen scaffold of five cubits long
and five cubits broad and three cubits high and had set it
in the midst of the court and upon it he stood and kneeled
down upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel and
spread forth his hands toward heaven.
and said O lord God of Israel there is no God like thee in
the heaven nor in the earth which keepest covenant and
shewest mercy unto thy servants that walk before thee with
all their hearts
thou which hast kept with thy servant David my father that
which thou hast promised him and spakest with thy mouth and
hast fulfilled it with thine hand as it is this day.
now therefore O lord God of Israel keep with thy servant
David my father that which thou hast promised him saying
there shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the
throne of Israel yet so that thy children take heed to their
way to walk in my law as thou hast walked before me.
now then O lord God of Israel let thy word be verified
which thou hast spoken unto thy servant David.
but will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold
heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee how Much
less this house which I have built
have respect therefore to the prayer of thy servant and to
his supplication O lord my God to hearken unto the cry and
the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee
that thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night
upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put
thy name there to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant
prayeth toward this place.
hearken therefore unto the supplications of thy servant and
of thy people Israel which they shall make toward this place
hear thou from thy dwelling place even from heaven and when
thou hearest forgive.
if a man Sin against his neighbour and an oath be laid upon
him to make him swear and the oath come before thine altar in
this house
then hear thou from heaven and do and judge thy servants by
requiting the wicked by recompensing his way upon his own
head and by justifying the righteous by giving him according
to his righteousness.
and if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy
because they have sinned against thee and shall return and
confess thy name and pray and make supplication before thee
in this house
then hear thou from the heavens and forgive the Sin of thy
people Israel and bring them again unto the land which thou
Gavest to them and to their fathers.
when the heaven is shut up and there is no rain because they
have sinned against thee yet if they pray toward this place
and confess thy name and turn from their Sin when thou dost
afflict them
then hear thou from heaven and forgive the Sin of thy
servants and of thy people Israel when thou hast taught them
the good way wherein they should walk and send rain upon thy
land which thou hast given unto thy people for an
inheritance.
if there be dearth in the land if there be pestilence if
there be blasting or mildew locusts or caterpillers if
their enemies besiege them in the cities of their land
whatsoever sore or whatsoever sickness there be
then what prayer or what supplication soever shall be made of
any man or of all thy people Israel when every one shall
know his own sore and his own grief and shall spread forth
his hands in this house
then hear thou from heaven thy dwelling place and forgive
and render unto every man according unto all his ways whose
heart thou knowest for thou only knowest the hearts of the
children of men
that they may fear thee to walk in thy ways so long as they
live in the land which thou Gavest unto our fathers.
moreover concerning the stranger which is not of thy people
Israel but is come from a far country for thy great name s
sake and thy Mighty hand and thy stretched out arm if they
come and pray in this house
then hear thou from the heavens even from thy dwelling place
and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for
that all people of the earth may know thy name and fear thee
as doth thy people Israel and may know that this house which
I have built is called by thy name.
if thy people go out to war against their enemies by the way
that thou shalt send them and they pray unto thee toward this
city which thou hast chosen and the house which I have built
for thy name
then hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their
supplication and maintain their cause.
if they Sin against thee for there is no man which sinneth
not and thou be angry with them and deliver them over
before their enemies and they carry them away captives unto a
land far off or near
yet if they bethink themselves in the land whither they are
carried captive and turn and pray unto thee in the land of
their captivity saying we have sinned we have done amiss
and have dealt wickedly
if they return to thee with all their heart and with all their
soul in the land of their captivity whither they have carried
them captives and pray toward their land which thou Gavest
unto their fathers and toward the city which thou hast
chosen and toward the house which I have built for thy name
then hear thou from the heavens even from thy dwelling place
their prayer and their supplications and maintain their
cause and forgive thy people which have sinned against thee.
now my God let I beseech thee thine eyes be open and let
thine ears be attent unto the prayer that is made in this
place.
now therefore Arise O lord God into thy resting place thou
and the ark of thy strength let thy priests O lord God be
clothed with salvation and let thy saints rejoice in
goodness.
O lord God turn not away the face of thine anointed remember
the mercies of David thy servant.
now when Solomon had made an end of praying the fire came
down from heaven and consumed the burnt offering and the
sacrifices and the glory of the lord filled the house.
and the priests could not enter into the house of the lord
because the glory of the lord had filled the lord s house.
and when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came
down and the glory of the lord upon the house they bowed
themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement
and worshipped and praised the lord saying for he is good
for his mercy endureth for ever.
then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the
lord.
and king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two
thousand oxen and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep so
the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.
and the priests waited on their offices the Levites also with
instruments of musick of the lord which David the king had
made to praise the lord because his mercy endureth for ever
when David praised by their ministry and the priests sounded
trumpets before them and all Israel stood.
moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was
before the house of the lord for there he offered burnt
offerings and the fat of the peace offerings because the
brasen altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive
the burnt offerings and the meat offerings and the fat.
also at the same time Solomon kept the feast seven days and
all Israel with him a very great congregation from the
entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt.
and in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly for they
kept the dedication of the altar seven days and the feast
seven days.
and on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he
sent the people away into their tents glad and merry in heart
for the goodness that the lord had shewed unto David and to
Solomon and to Israel his people.
thus Solomon finished the house of the lord and the king s
house and all that came into Solomon s heart to make in the
house of the lord and in his own house he prosperously
effected.
and the lord appeared to Solomon by night and said unto him
I have heard thy prayer and have chosen this place to myself
for an house of sacrifice.
if I shut up heaven that there be no rain or if I command the
locusts to devour the land or if I send pestilence among my
people
if my people which are called by my name shall humble
themselves and pray and seek my face and turn from their
wicked ways then will I hear from heaven and will forgive
their Sin and will heal their land.
now mine eyes shall be open and mine ears attent unto the
prayer that is made in this place.
for now have I chosen and sanctified this house that my name
may be there for ever and mine eyes and mine heart shall be
there perpetually.
and as for thee if thou wilt walk before me as David thy
father walked and do according to all that I have commanded
thee and shalt observe my statutes and my judgments
then will I stablish the throne of thy kingdom according as I
have covenanted with David thy father saying there shall not
fail thee a man to be ruler in Israel.
but if ye turn away and forsake my statutes and my
commandments which I have set before you and shall go and
serve other gods and worship them
then will I pluck them up by the roots out of my land which I
have given them and this house which I have sanctified for
my name will I cast out of my sight and will make it to be a
proverb and a byword among all nations.
and this house which is high shall be an astonishment to
every one that passeth by it so that he shall say why hath
the lord done thus unto this land and unto this house?
and it shall be answered because they forsook the lord God of
their fathers which brought them forth out of the land of
Egypt and laid hold on other gods and worshipped them and
served them therefore hath he brought all this evil upon
them.
and it came to pass at the end of twenty years wherein
Solomon had built the house of the lord and his own house
that the cities which Huram had restored to Solomon Solomon
built them and caused the children of Israel to dwell there.
and Solomon went to Hamathzobah and prevailed against it.
and he built Tadmor in the wilderness and all the store
cities which he built in Hamath.
also he built Bethhoron the upper and Bethhoron the nether
fenced cities with walls gates and bars
and Baalath and all the store cities that Solomon had and
all the chariot cities and the cities of the horsemen and
all that Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem and in
Lebanon and throughout all the land of his dominion.
as for all the people that were left of the Hittites and the
Amorites and the Perizzites and the Hivites and the
Jebusites which were not of Israel
but of their children who were left after them in the land
whom the children of Israel consumed not them did Solomon
make to pay tribute until this day.
but of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for
his work but they were men of war and chief of his captains
and captains of his chariots and horsemen.
and these were the chief of king Solomon s officers even two
hundred and fifty that bare rule over the people.
and Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city
of David unto the house that he had built for her for he
said my wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of
Israel because the places are holy whereunto the ark of the
lord hath come.
then Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the lord on the
altar of the lord which he had built before the porch
even after a certain rate every day offering according to the
commandment of Moses on the sabbaths and on the new moons
and on the solemn feasts three times in the year even in the
feast of unleavened bread and in the feast of weeks and in
the feast of tabernacles.
and he appointed according to the order of David his father
the courses of the priests to their service and the Levites
to their charges to praise and minister before the priests
as the duty of every day required the porters also by their
courses at every gate for so had David the man of God
commanded.
and they departed not from the commandment of the king unto
the priests and Levites concerning any matter or concerning
the treasures.
now all the work of Solomon was prepared unto the day of the
foundation of the house of the lord and until it was
finished. so the house of the lord was perfected.
then went Solomon to Eziongeber and to Eloth at the sea side
in the land of Edom.
and Huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships and
servants that had knowledge of the sea and they went with the
servants of Solomon to Ophir and took thence four hundred and
fifty talents of gold and brought them to king Solomon.
and when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon she
came to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem with a
very great company and camels that bare spices and gold in
abundance and precious stones and when she was come to
Solomon she communed with him of all that was in her heart.
and Solomon told her all her questions and there was nothing
hid from Solomon which he told her not.
and when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon
and the house that he had built
and the meat of his table and the sitting of his servants
and the attendance of his ministers and their apparel his
cupbearers also and their apparel and his ascent by which he
went up into the house of the lord there was no more spirit
in her.
and she said to the king it was a true report which I heard
in mine own land of thine acts and of thy wisdom
howbeit I believed not their words until I came and mine
eyes had seen it and behold the one half of the greatness
of thy wisdom was not told me for thou exceedest the fame
that I heard.
happy are thy men and happy are these thy servants which
stand continually before thee and hear thy wisdom.
blessed be the lord thy God which delighted in thee to set
thee on his throne to be king for the lord thy God because
thy God loved Israel to establish them for ever therefore
made he thee king over them to do judgment and justice.
and she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold
and of spices great abundance and precious stones Neither
was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave king
Solomon.
and the servants also of Huram and the servants of Solomon
which brought gold from Ophir brought algum trees and
precious stones.
and the king made of the algum trees terraces to the house of
the lord and to the king s palace and harps and psalteries
for singers and there were none such seen before in the land
of Judah.
and king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire
whatsoever she asked beside that which she had brought unto
the king. so she turned and went away to her own land she
and her servants.
now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was
six hundred and threescore and six talents of gold
beside that which chapmen and merchants brought. and all the
kings of Arabia and governors of the country brought gold and
Silver to Solomon.
and king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold six
hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target.
and three hundred shields made he of beaten gold three
hundred shekels of gold went to one shield. and the king put
them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.
moreover the king made a great throne of ivory and overlaid
it with pure gold.
and there were six steps to the throne with a footstool of
gold which were fastened to the throne and stays on each
side of the sitting place and two lions standing by the
stays
and twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other
upon the six steps. there was not the like made in any
kingdom.
and all the drinking vessels of king Solomon were of gold and
all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of
pure gold none were of Silver it was not any thing accounted
of in the days of Solomon.
for the king s ships went to Tarshish with the servants of
Huram every three years once came the ships of Tarshish
bringing gold and Silver ivory and apes and peacocks.
and king Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in Riches
and wisdom.
and all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon
to hear his wisdom that God had put in his heart.
and they brought every man his present vessels of Silver and
vessels of gold and raiment harness and spices horses and
mules a rate year by year.
and Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots
and twelve thousand horsemen whom he bestowed in the chariot
cities and with the king at Jerusalem.
and he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the
land of the Philistines and to the border of Egypt.
and the king made Silver in Jerusalem as stones and cedar
trees made he as the sycomore trees that are in the low plains
in abundance.
and they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt and out of
all lands.
now the rest of the acts of Solomon first and last are they
not written in the book of Nathan the prophet and in the
prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite and in the visions of Iddo
the seer against Jeroboam the son of Nebat?
and Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.
and Solomon slept with his fathers and he was buried in the
city of David his father and Rehoboam his son reigned in his
stead.
and Rehoboam went to Shechem for to Shechem were all Israel
come to make him king.
and it came to pass when Jeroboam the son of Nebat who was
in Egypt whither he fled from the presence of Solomon the
king heard it that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.
and they sent and called him. so Jeroboam and all Israel came
and spake to Rehoboam saying
thy father made our yoke grievous now therefore ease thou
somewhat the grievous servitude of thy father and his heavy
yoke that he put upon us and we will serve thee.
and he said unto them come again unto me after three days.
and the people departed.
and king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood
before Solomon his father while he yet lived saying what
counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?
and they spake unto him saying if thou be kind to this
people and please them and speak good words to them they
will be thy servants for ever.
but he forsook the counsel which the old men gave him and
took counsel with the young men that were brought up with him
that stood before him.
and he said unto them what advice give ye that we may return
answer to this people which have spoken to me saying ease
somewhat the yoke that thy father did put upon us?
and the young men that were brought up with him spake unto
him saying thus shalt thou answer the people that spake unto
thee saying thy father made our yoke heavy but make thou it
somewhat lighter for us thus shalt thou say unto them my
little finger shall be thicker than my father s loins.
for whereas my father put a heavy yoke upon you I will put
more to your yoke my father chastised you with whips but I
will chastise you with scorpions.
so Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third
day as the king bade saying come again to me on the third
day.
and the king answered them roughly and king Rehoboam forsook
the counsel of the old men
and answered them after the advice of the young men saying
my father made your yoke heavy but I will add thereto my
father chastised you with whips but I will chastise you with
scorpions.
so the king hearkened not unto the people for the cause was
of God that the lord might perform his word which he spake
by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of
Nebat.
and when all Israel saw that the king would not hearken unto
them the people answered the king saying what portion have
we in David? and we have none inheritance in the son of Jesse
every man to your tents O Israel and now David see to
thine own house. so all Israel went to their tents.
but as for the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of
Judah Rehoboam reigned over them.
then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram that was over the tribute and
the children of Israel stoned him with stones that he died.
but king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot to
flee to Jerusalem.
and Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.
and when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem he gathered of the
house of Judah and Benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand
chosen men which were warriors to fight against Israel that
he might bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam.
but the word of the lord came to Shemaiah the man of God
saying
speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon king of Judah and to
all Israel in Judah and Benjamin saying
thus saith the lord ye shall not go up nor fight against
your brethren return every man to his house for this thing
is done of me. and they obeyed the words of the lord and
returned from going against Jeroboam.
and Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem and built cities for defence
in Judah.
he built even Bethlehem and Etam and Tekoa
and Bethzur and Shoco and Adullam
and Gath and Mareshah and Ziph
and Adoraim and Lachish and Azekah
and Zorah and Aijalon and Hebron which are in Judah and in
Benjamin fenced cities.
and he fortified the strong holds and put captains in them
and store of victual and of oil and wine.
and in every several city he put shields and spears and made
them exceeding strong having Judah and Benjamin on his side.
and the priests and the Levites that were in all Israel
resorted to him out of all their coasts.
for the Levites left their suburbs and their possession and
came to Judah and Jerusalem for Jeroboam and his sons had
cast them off from executing the priest s office unto the
lord
and he ordained him priests for the high places and for the
devils and for the calves which he had made.
and after them out of all the tribes of Israel such as set
their hearts to seek the lord God of Israel came to Jerusalem
to sacrifice unto the lord God of their fathers.
so they strengthened the kingdom of Judah and made Rehoboam
the son of Solomon strong three years for three years they
walked in the way of David and Solomon.
and Rehoboam took him Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the
son of David to wife and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the
son of Jesse
which bare him children Jeush and Shamariah and Zaham.
and after her he took Maachah the daughter of Absalom which
bare him Abijah and Attai and Ziza and Shelomith.
and Rehoboam loved Maachah the daughter of Absalom above all
his wives and his concubines for he took eighteen wives and
threescore concubines and begat twenty and eight sons and
threescore daughters.
and Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Maachah the chief to be
ruler among his brethren for he thought to make him king.
and he dealt wisely and dispersed of all his children
throughout all the countries of Judah and Benjamin unto every
fenced city and he gave them victual in abundance. and he
desired many wives.
and it came to pass when Rehoboam had established the
kingdom and had strengthened himself he forsook the law of
the lord and all Israel with him.
and it came to pass that in the fifth year of king Rehoboam
Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem because they
had transgressed against the lord
with twelve hundred chariots and threescore thousand
horsemen and the people were without number that came with
him out of Egypt the Lubims the Sukkiims and the
Ethiopians.
and he took the fenced cities which pertained to Judah and
came to Jerusalem.
then came Shemaiah the prophet to Rehoboam and to the princes
of Judah that were gathered together to Jerusalem because of
Shishak and said unto them thus saith the lord ye have
forsaken me and therefore have I also left you in the hand of
Shishak.
whereupon the princes of Israel and the king humbled
themselves and they said the lord is righteous.
and when the lord saw that they humbled themselves the word
of the lord came to Shemaiah saying they have humbled
themselves therefore I will not destroy them but I will
grant them some deliverance and my wrath shall not be poured
out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.
nevertheless they shall be his servants that they may know my
service and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.
so Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem and took
away the treasures of the house of the lord and the treasures
of the king s house he took all he carried away also the
shields of gold which Solomon had made.
instead of which king Rehoboam made shields of brass and
committed them to the hands of the chief of the guard that
kept the entrance of the king s house.
and when the king entered into the house of the lord the
guard came and fetched them and brought them again into the
guard chamber.
and when he humbled himself the wrath of the lord turned from
him that he would not destroy him altogether and also in
Judah things went well.
so king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem and
reigned for Rehoboam was one and forty years old when he
began to reign and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem
the city which the lord had chosen out of all the tribes of
Israel to put his name there. and his mother s name was
Naamah an Ammonitess.
and he did evil because he prepared not his heart to seek the
lord.
now the acts of Rehoboam first and last are they not written
in the book of Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer
concerning genealogies? and there were wars between Rehoboam
and Jeroboam continually.
and Rehoboam slept with his fathers and was buried in the
city of David and Abijah his son reigned in his stead.
now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to
reign over Judah.
he reigned three years in Jerusalem. his mother s name also
was Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. and there was
war between Abijah and Jeroboam.
and Abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men
of war even four hundred thousand chosen men Jeroboam also
set the battle in array against him with eight hundred
thousand chosen men being Mighty men of valour.
and Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim which is in mount
Ephraim and said hear me thou Jeroboam and all Israel
ought ye not to know that the lord God of Israel gave the
kingdom over Israel to David for ever even to him and to his
sons by a covenant of salt?
yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat the servant of Solomon the son
of David is risen up and hath rebelled against his lord.
and there are gathered unto him vain men the children of
Belial and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the
son of Solomon when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted and
could not withstand them.
and now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the lord in the
hand of the sons of David and ye be a great multitude and
there are with your golden calves which Jeroboam made you for
gods.
have ye not cast out the priests of the lord the sons of
Aaron and the Levites and have made you priests after the
manner of the nations of other lands? so that whosoever cometh
to consecrate himself with a young bullock and seven rams the
same may be a priest of them that are no gods.
but as for us the lord is our God and we have not forsaken
him and the priests which minister unto the lord are the
sons of Aaron and the Levites wait upon their business
and they burn unto the lord every morning and every evening
burnt sacrifices and sweet incense the shewbread also set
they in order upon the pure table and the candlestick of gold
with the lamps thereof to burn every evening for we keep the
charge of the lord our God but ye have forsaken him.
and behold God himself is with us for our captain and his
priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O
children of Israel fight ye not against the lord God of your
fathers for ye shall not prosper.
but Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them
so they were before Judah and the ambushment was behind them.
and when Judah looked back behold the battle was before and
behind and they cried unto the lord and the priests sounded
with the trumpets.
then the men of Judah gave a shout and as the men of Judah
shouted it came to pass that God smote Jeroboam and all
Israel before Abijah and Judah.
and the children of Israel fled before Judah and God
delivered them into their hand.
and Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter so
there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen
men.
thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time
and the children of Judah prevailed because they relied upon
the lord God of their fathers.
and Abijah pursued after Jeroboam and took cities from him
Bethel with the towns thereof and Jeshanah with the towns
thereof and Ephraim with the towns thereof.
Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of
Abijah and the lord struck him and he died.
but Abijah waxed Mighty and married fourteen wives and begat
twenty and two sons and sixteen daughters.
and the rest of the acts of Abijah and his ways and his
sayings are written in the story of the prophet Iddo.
so Abijah slept with his fathers and they buried him in the
city of David and Asa his son reigned in his stead. in his
days the land was quiet Ten years.
and Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the
lord his God
for he took away the altars of the strange gods and the high
places and brake down the images and cut down the groves
and commanded Judah to seek the lord God of their fathers and
to do the law and the commandment.
also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high
places and the images and the kingdom was quiet before him.
and he built fenced cities in Judah for the land had rest
and he had no war in those years because the lord had given
him rest.
therefore he said unto Judah let us build these cities and
make about them walls and towers gates and bars while the
land is yet before us because we have sought the lord our
God we have sought him and he hath given us rest on every
side. so they built and prospered.
and Asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears out
of Judah three hundred thousand and out of Benjamin that
bare shields and drew bows two hundred and fourscore
thousand all these were Mighty men of valour.
and there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an
host of a thousand thousand and three hundred chariots and
came unto Mareshah.
then Asa went out against him and they set the battle in
array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.
and Asa cried unto the lord his God and said lord it is
nothing with thee to help whether with many or with them
that have no power help us O lord our God for we rest on
thee and in thy name we go against this multitude. O lord
thou art our God let no man prevail against thee.
so the lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa and before Judah
and the Ethiopians fled.
and Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto
Gerar and the Ethiopians were overthrown that they could not
recover themselves for they were destroyed before the lord
and before his host and they carried away very Much spoil.
and they smote all the cities round about Gerar for the fear
of the lord came upon them and they spoiled all the cities
for there was exceeding Much spoil in them.
they smote also the tents of cattle and carried away sheep
and camels in abundance and returned to Jerusalem.
and the spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded
and he went out to meet Asa and said unto him hear ye me
Asa and all Judah and Benjamin the lord is with you while
ye be with him and if ye seek him he will be found of you
but if ye forsake him he will forsake you.
now for a long season Israel hath been without the true God
and without a teaching priest and without law.
but when they in their trouble did turn unto the lord God of
Israel and sought him he was found of them.
and in those times there was no peace to him that went out
nor to him that came in but great vexations were upon all the
inhabitants of the countries.
and nation was destroyed of nation and city of city for God
did vex them with all adversity.
be ye strong therefore and let not your hands be weak for
your work shall be rewarded.
and when Asa heard these words and the prophecy of Oded the
prophet he took courage and put away the abominable idols
out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin and out of the
cities which he had taken from mount Ephraim and renewed the
altar of the lord that was before the porch of the lord.
and he gathered all Judah and Benjamin and the strangers with
them out of Ephraim and Manasseh and out of Simeon for they
fell to him out of Israel in abundance when they saw that the
lord his God was with him.
so they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third
month in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.
and they offered unto the lord the same time of the spoil
which they had brought seven hundred oxen and seven thousand
sheep.
and they entered into a covenant to seek the lord God of their
fathers with all their heart and with all their soul
that whosoever would not seek the lord God of Israel should be
put to death whether small or great whether man or woman.
and they sware unto the lord with a loud voice and with
shouting and with trumpets and with cornets.
and all Judah rejoiced at the oath for they had sworn with
all their heart and sought him with their whole desire and
he was found of them and the lord gave them rest round about.
and also concerning Maachah the mother of Asa the king he
removed her from being queen because she had made an idol in
a grove and Asa cut down her idol and stamped it and burnt
it at the brook Kidron.
but the high places were not taken away out of Israel
nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.
and he brought into the house of God the things that his
father had dedicated and that he himself had dedicated
Silver and gold and vessels.
and there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of
the reign of Asa.
in the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king
of Israel came up against Judah and built Ramah to the
intent that he might let none go out or come in to Asa king of
Judah.
then Asa brought out Silver and gold out of the treasures of
the house of the lord and of the king s house and sent to
Benhadad king of Syria that dwelt at Damascus saying
there is a league between me and thee as there was between my
father and thy father behold I have sent thee Silver and
gold go break thy league with Baasha king of Israel that he
may depart from me.
and Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa and sent the captains of
his armies against the cities of Israel and they smote Ijon
and Dan and Abelmaim and all the store cities of Naphtali.
and it came to pass when Baasha heard it that he left off
building of Ramah and let his work cease.
then Asa the king took all Judah and they carried away the
stones of Ramah and the timber thereof wherewith Baasha was
building and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah.
and at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah
and said unto him because thou hast relied on the king of
Syria and not relied on the lord thy God therefore is the
host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine hand.
were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host with very
many chariots and horsemen? yet because thou didst rely on
the lord he delivered them into thine hand.
for the eyes of the lord run to and fro throughout the whole
earth to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose
heart is perfect toward him. herein thou hast done foolishly
therefore from henceforth thou shalt have wars.
then Asa was wroth with the seer and put him in a prison
house for he was in a rage with him because of this thing.
and Asa oppressed some of the people the same time.
and behold the acts of Asa first and last lo they are
written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
and Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased
in his feet until his disease was exceeding great yet in his
disease he sought not to the lord but to the physicians.
and Asa slept with his fathers and died in the one and
fortieth year of his reign.
and they buried him in his own sepulchres which he had made
for himself in the city of David and laid him in the bed
which was filled with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices
prepared by the apothecaries art and they made a very great
burning for him.
and Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead and strengthened
himself against Israel.
and he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah and
set garrisons in the land of Judah and in the cities of
Ephraim which Asa his father had taken.
and the lord was with Jehoshaphat because he walked in the
first ways of his father David and sought not unto Baalim
but sought to the lord God of his father and walked in his
commandments and not after the doings of Israel.
therefore the lord stablished the kingdom in his hand and all
Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents and he had Riches and
honour in abundance.
and his heart was lifted up in the ways of the lord moreover
he took away the high places and groves out of Judah.
also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes
even to Benhail and to Obadiah and to Zechariah and to
Nethaneel and to Michaiah to teach in the cities of Judah.
and with them he sent Levites even Shemaiah and Nethaniah
and Zebadiah and Asahel and Shemiramoth and Jehonathan and
Adonijah and Tobijah and Tobadonijah Levites and with them
Elishama and Jehoram priests.
and they taught in Judah and had the book of the law of the
lord with them and went about throughout all the cities of
Judah and taught the people.
and the fear of the lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the
lands that were round about Judah so that they made no war
against Jehoshaphat.
also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents and
tribute Silver and the Arabians brought him flocks seven
thousand and seven hundred rams and seven thousand and seven
hundred he goats.
and Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly and he built in Judah
castles and cities of store.
and he had Much business in the cities of Judah and the men
of war Mighty men of valour were in Jerusalem.
and these are the numbers of them according to the house of
their fathers of Judah the captains of thousands Adnah the
chief and with him Mighty men of valour three hundred
thousand.
and next to him was Jehohanan the captain and with him two
hundred and fourscore thousand.
and next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri who willingly
offered himself unto the lord and with him two hundred
thousand Mighty men of valour.
and of Benjamin Eliada a Mighty man of valour and with him
armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand.
and next him was Jehozabad and with him an hundred and
fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war.
these waited on the king beside those whom the king put in
the fenced cities throughout all Judah.
now Jehoshaphat had Riches and honour in abundance and joined
affinity with Ahab.
and after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. and
Ahab killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance and for the
people that he had with him and persuaded him to go up with
him to Ramothgilead.
and Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah
wilt thou go with me to Ramothgilead? and he answered him I
Am as thou art and my people as thy people and we will be
with thee in the war.
and Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel enquire I pray
thee at the word of the lord to day.
therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets
four hundred men and said unto them shall we go to
Ramothgilead to battle or shall I forbear? and they said go
up for God will deliver it into the king s hand.
but Jehoshaphat said is there not here a prophet of the lord
besides that we might enquire of him?
and the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat there is yet one
man by whom we may enquire of the lord but I hate him for
he never prophesied good unto me but always evil the same is
Micaiah the son of Imla. and Jehoshaphat said let not the
king say so.
and the king of Israel called for one of his officers and
said fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.
and the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat
either of them on his throne clothed in their robes and they
sat in a void place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria
and all the prophets prophesied before them.
and Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of Iron
and said thus saith the lord with these thou shalt push
Syria until they be consumed.
and all the prophets prophesied so saying go up to
Ramothgilead and prosper for the lord shall deliver it into
the hand of the king.
and the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him
saying behold the words of the prophets declare good to the
king with one assent let thy word therefore I pray thee be
like one of their s and speak thou good.
and Micaiah said as the lord liveth even what my God saith
that will I speak.
and when he was come to the king the king said unto him
Micaiah shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle or shall I
forbear? and he said go ye up and prosper and they shall be
delivered into your hand.
and the king said to him how many times shall I adjure thee
that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the
lord?
then he said I did see all Israel scattered upon the
mountains as sheep that have no Shepherd and the lord said
these have no Master let them return therefore every man to
his house in peace.
and the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat did I not tell
thee that he would not prophesy good unto me but evil?
again he said therefore hear the word of the lord I saw the
lord sitting upon his throne and all the host of heaven
standing on his right hand and on his left.
and the lord said who shall entice Ahab king of Israel that
he may go up and fall at Ramothgilead? and one spake saying
after this manner and another saying after that manner.
then there came out a spirit and stood before the lord and
said I will entice him. and the lord said unto him
wherewith?
and he said I will go out and be a lying spirit in the mouth
of all his prophets. and the lord said thou shalt entice him
and thou shalt also prevail go out and do even so.
now therefore behold the lord hath put a lying spirit in the
mouth of these thy prophets and the lord hath spoken evil
against thee.
then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near and smote
Micaiah upon the cheek and said which way went the spirit of
the lord from me to speak unto thee?
and Micaiah said behold thou shalt see on that day when thou
shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.
then the king of Israel said take ye Micaiah and carry him
back to Amon the Governor of the city and to Joash the king s
son
and say thus saith the king put this fellow in the prison
and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of
affliction until I return in peace.
and Micaiah said if thou certainly return in peace then hath
not the lord spoken by me. and he said hearken all ye
people.
so the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went
up to Ramothgilead.
and the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat I will disguise
myself and I will go to the battle but put thou on thy
robes. so the king of Israel disguised himself and they went
to the battle.
now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of the
chariots that were with him saying fight ye not with small
or great save only with the king of Israel.
and it came to pass when the captains of the chariots saw
Jehoshaphat that they said it is the king of Israel.
therefore they compassed about him to fight but Jehoshaphat
cried out and the lord helped him and God moved them to
depart from him.
for it came to pass that when the captains of the chariots
perceived that it was not the king of Israel they turned back
again from pursuing him.
and a certain man drew a bow at a venture and smote the king
of Israel between the joints of the harness therefore he said
to his chariot man turn thine hand that thou mayest carry me
out of the host for I Am wounded.
and the battle increased that day howbeit the king of Israel
stayed himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the
even and about the time of the sun going down he died.
and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in
peace to Jerusalem.
and Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him and
said to king Jehoshaphat shouldest thou help the ungodly and
love them that hate the lord? therefore is wrath upon thee
from before the lord.
nevertheless there are good things found in thee in that thou
hast taken away the groves out of the land and hast prepared
thine heart to seek God.
and Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem and he went out again
through the people from Beersheba to mount Ephraim and
brought them back unto the lord God of their fathers.
and he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities
of Judah city by city
and said to the judges take heed what ye do for ye judge not
for man but for the lord who is with you in the judgment.
wherefore now let the fear of the lord be upon you take heed
and do it for there is no iniquity with the lord our God nor
respect of persons nor taking of gifts.
moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites and
of the priests and of the chief of the fathers of Israel for
the judgment of the lord and for controversies when they
returned to Jerusalem.
and he charged them saying thus shall ye do in the fear of
the lord faithfully and with a perfect heart.
and what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that
dwell in your cities between blood and blood between law and
commandment statutes and judgments ye shall even warn them
that they trespass not against the lord and so wrath come
upon you and upon your brethren this do and ye shall not
trespass.
and behold Amariah the chief priest is over you in all
matters of the lord and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael the
ruler of the house of Judah for all the king s matters also
the Levites shall be officers before you. deal courageously
and the lord shall be with the good.
it came to pass after this also that the children of Moab
and the children of Ammon and with them other beside the
Ammonites came against Jehoshaphat to battle.
then there came some that told Jehoshaphat saying there
cometh a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea on
this side Syria and behold they be in Hazazontamar which
is Engedi.
and Jehoshaphat feared and set himself to seek the lord and
proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.
and Judah gathered themselves together to ask help of the
lord even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek
the lord.
and Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and
Jerusalem in the house of the lord before the new court
and said O lord God of our fathers art not thou God in
heaven? and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the
heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might so
that none is able to withstand thee?
art not thou our God who didst drive out the inhabitants of
this land before thy people Israel and Gavest it to the seed
of Abraham thy friend for ever?
and they dwelt therein and have built thee a sanctuary
therein for thy name saying
if when evil cometh upon us as the sword judgment or
pestilence or famine we stand before this house and in thy
presence for thy name is in this house and cry unto thee
in our affliction then thou wilt hear and help.
and now behold the children of Ammon and Moab and mount
Seir whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade when they came
out of the land of Egypt but they turned from them and
destroyed them not
behold I say how they reward us to come to cast us out of
thy possession which thou hast given us to inherit.
O our God wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might
against this great company that cometh against us Neither
know we what to do but our eyes are upon thee.
and all Judah stood before the lord with their little ones
their wives and their children.
then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah the son of Benaiah
the son of Jeiel the son of Mattaniah a Levite of the sons
of Asaph came the spirit of the lord in the midst of the
congregation
and he said hearken ye all Judah and ye inhabitants of
Jerusalem and thou king Jehoshaphat thus saith the lord unto
you be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great
multitude for the battle is not yours but God s.
to morrow go ye down against them behold they come up by the
cliff of Ziz and ye shall find them at the end of the brook
before the wilderness of Jeruel.
ye shall not need to fight in this battle set yourselves
stand ye still and see the salvation of the lord with you O
Judah and Jerusalem fear not nor be dismayed to morrow go
out against them for the lord will be with you.
and Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground
and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the
lord worshipping the lord.
and the Levites of the children of the Kohathites and of the
children of the Korhites stood up to praise the lord God of
Israel with a loud voice on high.
and they rose early in the morning and went forth into the
wilderness of Tekoa and as they went forth Jehoshaphat stood
and said hear me O Judah and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem
believe in the lord your God so shall ye be established
believe his prophets so shall ye prosper.
and when he had consulted with the people he appointed
singers unto the lord and that should praise the beauty of
holiness as they went out before the army and to say praise
the lord for his mercy endureth for ever.
and when they began to sing and to praise the lord set
ambushments against the children of Ammon Moab and mount
Seir which were come against Judah and they were smitten.
for the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the
inhabitants of mount Seir utterly to slay and destroy them
and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir
every one helped to destroy another.
and when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness
they looked unto the multitude and behold they were dead
bodies fallen to the earth and none escaped.
and when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take away the
spoil of them they found among them in abundance both Riches
with the dead bodies and precious jewels which they stripped
off for themselves more than they could carry away and they
were three days in gathering of the spoil it was so Much.
and on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley
of Berachah for there they blessed the lord therefore the
name of the same place was called the valley of Berachah
unto this day.
then they returned every man of Judah and Jerusalem and
Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them to go again to Jerusalem
with joy for the lord had made them to rejoice over their
enemies.
and they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and
trumpets unto the house of the lord.
and the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of those
countries when they had heard that the lord fought against
the enemies of Israel.
so the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet for his God gave him
rest round about.
and Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah he was thirty and five
years old when he began to reign and he reigned twenty and
five years in Jerusalem. and his mother s name was Azubah the
daughter of Shilhi.
and he walked in the way of Asa his father and departed not
from it doing that which was right in the sight of the lord.
howbeit the high places were not taken away for as yet the
people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their
fathers.
now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat first and last
behold they are written in the book of Jehu the son of
Hanani who is mentioned in the book of the kings of Israel.
and after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with
Ahaziah king of Israel who did very wickedly
and he joined himself with him to make ships to go to
Tarshish and they made the ships in Eziongaber.
then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against
Jehoshaphat saying because thou hast joined thyself with
Ahaziah the lord hath broken thy works. and the ships were
broken that they were not able to go to Tarshish.
now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers and was buried with
his fathers in the city of David. and Jehoram his son reigned
in his stead.
and he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat Azariah and
Jehiel and Zechariah and Azariah and Michael and
Shephatiah all these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of
Israel.
and their father gave them great gifts of Silver and of gold
and of precious things with fenced cities in Judah but the
kingdom gave he to Jehoram because he was the firstborn.
now when Jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father he
strengthened himself and slew all his brethren with the
sword and divers also of the princes of Israel.
Jehoram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign
and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
and he walked in the way of the kings of Israel like as did
the house of Ahab for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife
and he wrought that which was evil in the eyes of the lord.
howbeit the lord would not destroy the house of David because
of the covenant that he had made with David and as he
promised to give a light to him and to his sons for ever.
in his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of
Judah and made themselves a king.
then Jehoram went forth with his princes and all his chariots
with him and he rose up by night and smote the Edomites
which compassed him in and the captains of the chariots.
so the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto
this day. the same time also did Libnah revolt from under his
hand because he had forsaken the lord God of his fathers.
moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah and
caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication and
compelled Judah thereto.
and there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet
saying thus saith the lord God of David thy father because
thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father
nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah
but hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel and hast
made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring
like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab and also hast
slain thy brethren of thy father s house which were better
than thyself
behold with a great plague will the lord smite thy people
and thy children and thy wives and all thy goods
and thou shalt have great sickness by disease of thy bowels
until thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by
day.
moreover the lord stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the
Philistines and of the Arabians that were near the
Ethiopians
and they came up into Judah and brake into it and carried
away all the substance that was found in the king s house and
his sons also and his wives so that there was never a son
left him save Jehoahaz the youngest of his sons.
and after all this the lord smote him in his bowels with an
incurable disease.
and it came to pass that in process of time after the end of
two years his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness so
he died of sore diseases. and his people made no burning for
him like the burning of his fathers.
thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign and he
reigned in Jerusalem eight years and departed without being
desired. howbeit they buried him in the city of David but not
in the sepulchres of the kings.
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son
king in his stead for the band of men that came with the
Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. so Ahaziah the
son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned.
forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign
and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. his mother s name also
was Athaliah the daughter of Omri.
he also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab for his
mother was his counsellor to do wickedly.
wherefore he did evil in the sight of the lord like the house
of Ahab for they were his counsellors after the death of his
father to his destruction.
he walked also after their counsel and went with Jehoram the
son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria
at Ramothgilead and the Syrians smote Joram.
and he returned to be healed in Jezreel because of the wounds
which were given him at Ramah when he fought with Hazael king
of Syria. and Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went
down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab at Jezreel because he was
sick.
and the destruction of Ahaziah was of God by coming to Joram
for when he was come he went out with Jehoram against Jehu
the son of Nimshi whom the lord had anointed to cut off the
house of Ahab.
and it came to pass that when Jehu was executing judgment
upon the house of Ahab and found the princes of Judah and
the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah that ministered to
Ahaziah he slew them.
and he sought Ahaziah and they caught him for he was hid in
Samaria and brought him to Jehu and when they had slain
him they buried him because said they he is the son of
Jehoshaphat who sought the lord with all his heart. so the
house of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the kingdom.
but when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was
dead she arose and destroyed all the seed royal of the house
of Judah.
but Jehoshabeath the daughter of the king took Joash the son
of Ahaziah and stole him from among the king s sons that were
slain and put him and his nurse in a bedchamber. so
Jehoshabeath the daughter of king Jehoram the wife of
Jehoiada the priest for she was the sister of Ahaziah hid
him from Athaliah so that she slew him not.
and he was with them hid in the house of God six years and
Athaliah reigned over the land.
and in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself and
took the captains of hundreds Azariah the son of Jeroham and
Ishmael the son of Jehohanan and Azariah the son of Obed and
Maaseiah the son of Adaiah and Elishaphat the son of Zichri
into covenant with him.
and they went about in Judah and gathered the Levites out of
all the cities of Judah and the chief of the fathers of
Israel and they came to Jerusalem.
and all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the
house of God. and he said unto them behold the king s son
shall reign as the lord hath said of the sons of David.
this is the thing that ye shall do a third part of you
entering on the sabbath of the priests and of the Levites
shall be porters of the doors
and a third part shall be at the king s house and a third
part at the gate of the foundation and all the people shall
be in the courts of the house of the lord.
but let none come into the house of the lord save the
priests and they that minister of the Levites they shall go
in for they are holy but all the people shall keep the watch
of the lord.
and the Levites shall compass the king round about every man
with his weapons in his hand and whosoever else cometh into
the house he shall be put to death but be ye with the king
when he cometh in and when he goeth out.
so the Levites and all Judah did according to all things that
Jehoiada the priest had commanded and took every man his men
that were to come in on the sabbath with them that were to go
out on the sabbath for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the
courses.
moreover Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of
hundreds spears and bucklers and shields that had been king
David s which were in the house of God.
and he set all the people every man having his weapon in his
hand from the right side of the temple to the left side of
the temple along by the altar and the temple by the king
round about.
then they brought out the king s son and put upon him the
crown and gave him the testimony and made him king. and
Jehoiada and his sons anointed him and said God save the
king.
now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and
praising the king she came to the people into the house of
the lord
and she looked and behold the king stood at his pillar at
the entering in and the princes and the trumpets by the king
and all the people of the land rejoiced and sounded with
trumpets also the singers with instruments of musick and
such as taught to sing praise. then Athaliah rent her clothes
and said treason treason.
then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds
that were set over the host and said unto them have her
forth of the ranges and whoso followeth her let him be slain
with the sword. for the priest said slay her not in the house
of the lord.
so they laid hands on her and when she was come to the
entering of the horse gate by the king s house they slew her
there.
and Jehoiada made a covenant between him and between all the
people and between the king that they should be the lord s
people.
then all the people went to the house of Baal and brake it
down and brake his altars and his images in pieces and slew
Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.
also Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the lord
by the hand of the priests the Levites whom David had
distributed in the house of the lord to offer the burnt
offerings of the lord as it is written in the law of Moses
with rejoicing and with singing as it was ordained by David.
and he set the porters at the gates of the house of the lord
that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in.
and he took the captains of hundreds and the nobles and the
governors of the people and all the people of the land and
brought down the king from the house of the lord and they
came through the high gate into the king s house and set the
king upon the throne of the kingdom.
and all the people of the land rejoiced and the city was
quiet after that they had slain Athaliah with the sword.
Joash was seven years old when he began to reign and he
reigned forty years in Jerusalem. his mother s name also was
Zibiah of Beersheba.
and Joash did that which was right in the sight of the lord
all the days of Jehoiada the priest.
and Jehoiada took for him two wives and he begat sons and
daughters.
and it came to pass after this that Joash was minded to
repair the house of the lord.
and he gathered together the priests and the Levites and said
to them go out unto the cities of Judah and gather of all
Israel money to repair the house of your God from year to
year and see that ye hasten the matter. howbeit the Levites
hastened it not.
and the king called for Jehoiada the chief and said unto him
why hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of
Judah and out of Jerusalem the collection according to the
commandment of Moses the servant of the lord and of the
congregation of Israel for the tabernacle of witness?
for the sons of Athaliah that wicked woman had broken up the
house of God and also all the dedicated things of the house
of the lord did they bestow upon Baalim.
and at the king s commandment they made a chest and set it
without at the gate of the house of the lord.
and they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem to
bring in to the lord the collection that Moses the servant of
God laid upon Israel in the wilderness.
and all the princes and all the people rejoiced and brought
in and cast into the chest until they had made an end.
now it came to pass that at what time the chest was brought
unto the king s office by the hand of the Levites and when
they saw that there was Much money the king s scribe and the
high priest s officer came and emptied the chest and took it
and carried it to his place again. thus they did day by day
and gathered money in abundance.
and the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of
the service of the house of the lord and hired masons and
carpenters to repair the house of the lord and also such as
wrought Iron and brass to mend the house of the lord.
so the workmen wrought and the work was perfected by them
and they set the house of God in his state and strengthened
it.
and when they had finished it they brought the rest of the
money before the king and Jehoiada whereof were made vessels
for the house of the lord even vessels to minister and to
offer withal and spoons and vessels of gold and Silver. and
they offered burnt offerings in the house of the lord
continually all the days of Jehoiada.
but Jehoiada waxed old and was full of days when he died an
hundred and thirty years old was he when he died.
and they buried him in the city of David among the kings
because he had done good in Israel both toward God and
toward his house.
now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah and
made obeisance to the king. then the king hearkened unto them.
and they left the house of the lord God of their fathers and
served groves and idols and wrath came upon Judah and
Jerusalem for this their trespass.
yet he sent prophets to them to bring them again unto the
lord and they testified against them but they would not give
ear.
and the spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada
the priest which stood above the people and said unto them
thus saith God why transgress ye the commandments of the
lord that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the
lord he hath also forsaken you.
and they conspired against him and stoned him with stones at
the commandment of the king in the court of the house of the
lord.
thus Joash the king remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada
his father had done to him but slew his son. and when he
died he said the lord look upon it and require it.
and it came to pass at the end of the year that the host of
Syria came up against him and they came to Judah and
Jerusalem and destroyed all the princes of the people from
among the people and sent all the spoil of them unto the king
of Damascus.
for the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men
and the lord delivered a very great host into their hand
because they had forsaken the lord God of their fathers. so
they executed judgment against Joash.
and when they were departed from him for they left him in
great diseases his own servants conspired against him for
the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest and slew him on
his bed and he died and they buried him in the city of
David but they buried him not in the sepulchres of the kings.
and these are they that conspired against him Zabad the son
of Shimeath an Ammonitess and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a
Moabitess.
now concerning his sons and the greatness of the burdens laid
upon him and the repairing of the house of God behold they
are written in the story of the book of the kings. and Amaziah
his son reigned in his stead.
Amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign
and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. and his
mother s name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.
and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord but
not with a perfect heart.
now it came to pass when the kingdom was established to him
that he slew his servants that had killed the king his father.
but he slew not their children but did as it is written in
the law in the book of Moses where the lord commanded
saying the fathers shall not die for the children Neither
shall the children die for the fathers but every man shall
die for his own Sin.
moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together and made them
captains over thousands and captains over hundreds according
to the houses of their fathers throughout all Judah and
Benjamin and he numbered them from twenty years old and
above and found them three hundred thousand choice men able
to go forth to war that could handle spear and shield.
he hired also an hundred thousand Mighty men of valour out of
Israel for an hundred talents of Silver.
but there came a man of God to him saying O king let not
the army of Israel go with thee for the lord is not with
Israel to wit with all the children of Ephraim.
but if thou wilt go do it be strong for the battle God
shall make thee fall before the enemy for God hath power to
help and to cast down.
and Amaziah said to the man of God but what shall we do for
the hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel?
and the man of God answered the lord is able to give thee
Much more than this.
then Amaziah separated them to wit the army that was come to
him out of Ephraim to go home again wherefore their anger
was greatly kindled against Judah and they returned home in
great anger.
and Amaziah strengthened himself and led forth his people
and went to the valley of salt and smote of the children of
Seir Ten thousand.
and other Ten thousand left alive did the children of Judah
carry away captive and brought them unto the top of the rock
and cast them down from the top of the rock that they all
were broken in pieces.
but the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back that
they should not go with him to battle fell upon the cities of
Judah from Samaria even unto Bethhoron and smote three
thousand of them and took Much spoil.
now it came to pass after that Amaziah was come from the
slaughter of the Edomites that he brought the gods of the
children of Seir and set them up to be his gods and bowed
down himself before them and burned incense unto them.
wherefore the anger of the lord was kindled against Amaziah
and he sent unto him a prophet which said unto him why hast
thou sought after the gods of the people which could not
deliver their own people out of thine hand?
and it came to pass as he talked with him that the king said
unto him art thou made of the king s counsel? forbear why
shouldest thou be smitten? then the prophet forbare and said
I know that God hath determined to destroy thee because thou
hast done this and hast not hearkened unto my counsel.
then Amaziah king of Judah took advice and sent to Joash the
son of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu king of Israel saying
come let us see one another in the face.
and Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah
saying the thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that
was in Lebanon saying give thy daughter to my son to wife
and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon and
trode down the thistle.
thou sayest lo thou hast smitten the Edomites and thine
heart lifteth thee up to boast abide now at home why
shouldest thou meddle to thine hurt that thou shouldest fall
even thou and Judah with thee?
but Amaziah would not hear for it came of God that he might
deliver them into the hand of their enemies because they
sought after the gods of Edom.
so Joash the king of Israel went up and they saw one another
in the face both he and Amaziah king of Judah at
Bethshemesh which belongeth to Judah.
and Judah was put to the worse before Israel and they fled
every man to his tent.
and Joash the king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah the
son of Joash the son of Jehoahaz at Bethshemesh and brought
him to Jerusalem and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from
the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate four hundred cubits.
and he took all the gold and the Silver and all the vessels
that were found in the house of God with Obededom and the
treasures of the king s house the hostages also and returned
to Samaria.
and Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the
death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.
now the rest of the acts of Amaziah first and last behold
are they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and
Israel?
now after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following
the lord they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem and
he fled to Lachish but they sent to Lachish after him and
slew him there.
and they brought him upon horses and buried him with his
fathers in the city of Judah.
then all the people of Judah took Uzziah who was sixteen
years old and made him king in the room of his father
Amaziah.
he built Eloth and restored it to Judah after that the king
slept with his fathers.
sixteen years old was Uzziah when he began to reign and he
reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. his mother s name
also was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.
and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord
according to all that his father Amaziah did.
and he sought God in the days of Zechariah who had
understanding in the visions of God and as long as he sought
the lord God made him to prosper.
and he went forth and warred against the Philistines and
brake down the wall of Gath and the wall of Jabneh and the
wall of Ashdod and built cities about Ashdod and among the
Philistines.
and God helped him against the Philistines and against the
Arabians that dwelt in Gurbaal and the Mehunims.
and the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah and his name spread
abroad even to the entering in of Egypt for he strengthened
himself exceedingly.
moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate
and at the valley gate and at the turning of the wall and
fortified them.
also he built towers in the desert and digged many wells for
he had Much cattle both in the low country and in the
plains husbandmen also and vine dressers in the mountains
and in Carmel for he loved husbandry.
moreover Uzziah had an host of fighting men that went out to
war by Bands according to the number of their account by the
hand of Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler under the
hand of Hananiah one of the king s captains.
the whole number of the chief of the fathers of the Mighty men
of valour were two thousand and six hundred.
and under their hand was an army three hundred thousand and
seven thousand and five hundred that made war with Mighty
power to help the king against the enemy.
and Uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields
and spears and helmets and habergeons and bows and slings
to cast stones.
and he made in Jerusalem engines invented by cunning men to
be on the towers and upon the bulwarks to shoot arrows and
great stones withal. and his name spread far abroad for he
was marvellously helped till he was strong.
but when he was strong his heart was lifted up to his
destruction for he transgressed against the lord his God and
went into the temple of the lord to burn incense upon the
altar of incense.
and Azariah the priest went in after him and with him
fourscore priests of the lord that were valiant men
and they withstood Uzziah the king and said unto him it
appertaineth not unto thee Uzziah to burn incense unto the
lord but to the priests the sons of Aaron that are
consecrated to burn incense go out of the sanctuary for thou
hast trespassed Neither shall it be for thine honour from the
lord God.
then Uzziah was wroth and had a censer in his hand to burn
incense and while he was wroth with the priests the leprosy
even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house
of the lord from beside the incense altar.
and Azariah the chief priest and all the priests looked upon
him and behold he was leprous in his forehead and they
thrust him out from thence yea himself hasted also to go
out because the lord had smitten him.
and Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death and
dwelt in a several house being a leper for he was cut off
from the house of the lord and Jotham his son was over the
king s house judging the people of the land.
now the rest of the acts of Uzziah first and last did Isaiah
the prophet the son of Amoz write.
so Uzziah slept with his fathers and they buried him with his
fathers in the field of the burial which belonged to the
kings for they said he is a leper and Jotham his son
reigned in his stead.
Jotham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign
and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. his mother s name
also was Jerushah the daughter of Zadok.
and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord
according to all that his father Uzziah did howbeit he
entered not into the temple of the lord. and the people did
yet corruptly.
he built the high gate of the house of the lord and on the
wall of Ophel he built Much.
moreover he built cities in the mountains of Judah and in the
forests he built castles and towers.
he fought also with the king of the Ammonites and prevailed
against them. and the children of Ammon gave him the same year
an hundred talents of Silver and Ten thousand measures of
wheat and Ten thousand of barley. so Much did the children of
Ammon pay unto him both the second year and the third.
so Jotham became Mighty because he prepared his ways before
the lord his God.
now the rest of the acts of Jotham and all his wars and his
ways lo they are written in the book of the kings of Israel
and Judah.
he was five and twenty years old when he began to reign and
reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.
and Jotham slept with his fathers and they buried him in the
city of David and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.
Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign and he
reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem but he did not that which
was right in the sight of the lord like David his father
for he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel and made
also molten images for Baalim.
moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom
and burnt his children in the fire after the abominations of
the heathen whom the lord had cast out before the children of
Israel.
he sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places and
on the hills and under every green tree.
wherefore the lord his God delivered him into the hand of the
king of Syria and they smote him and carried away a great
multitude of them captives and brought them to Damascus. and
he was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel who
smote him with a great slaughter.
for Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and
twenty thousand in one day which were all valiant men
because they had forsaken the lord God of their fathers.
and Zichri a Mighty man of Ephraim slew Maaseiah the king s
son and Azrikam the Governor of the house and Elkanah that
was next to the king.
and the children of Israel carried away captive of their
brethren two hundred thousand women sons and daughters and
took also away Much spoil from them and brought the spoil to
Samaria.
but a prophet of the lord was there whose name was Oded and
he went out before the host that came to Samaria and said
unto them behold because the lord God of your fathers was
wroth with Judah he hath delivered them into your hand and
ye have slain them in a rage that reacheth up unto heaven.
and now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and
Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you but are there
not with you even with you sins against the lord your God?
now hear me therefore and deliver the captives again which
ye have taken captive of your brethren for the fierce wrath
of the lord is upon you.
then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim Azariah
the son of Johanan Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth and
Jehizkiah the son of Shallum and Amasa the son of Hadlai
stood up against them that came from the war
and said unto them ye shall not bring in the captives hither
for whereas we have offended against the lord already ye
intend to add more to our sins and to our trespass for our
trespass is great and there is fierce wrath against Israel.
so the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the
princes and all the congregation.
and the men which were expressed by name rose up and took the
captives and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among
them and arrayed them and shod them and gave them to eat
and to drink and anointed them and carried all the feeble of
them upon asses and brought them to Jericho the city of palm
trees to their brethren then they returned to Samaria.
at that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assyria to
help him.
for again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah and carried
away captives.
the Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low
country and of the south of Judah and had taken Bethshemesh
and Ajalon and Gederoth and Shocho with the villages
thereof and Timnah with the villages thereof Gimzo also and
the villages thereof and they dwelt there.
for the lord brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel
for he made Judah naked and transgressed sore against the
lord.
and Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria came unto him and
distressed him but strengthened him not.
for Ahaz took away a portion out of the house of the lord and
out of the house of the king and of the princes and gave it
unto the king of Assyria but he helped him not.
and in the time of his distress did he trespass yet more
against the lord this is that king Ahaz.
for he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus which smote him
and he said because the gods of the kings of Syria help them
therefore will I sacrifice to them that they may help me. but
they were the ruin of him and of all Israel.
and Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God
and cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God and shut up
the doors of the house of the lord and he made him altars in
every corner of Jerusalem.
and in every several city of Judah he made high places to burn
incense unto other gods and provoked to anger the lord God of
his fathers.
now the rest of his acts and of all his ways first and last
behold they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and
Israel.
and Ahaz slept with his fathers and they buried him in the
city even in Jerusalem but they brought him not into the
sepulchres of the kings of Israel and Hezekiah his son
reigned in his stead.
Hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old
and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem. and his
mother s name was Abijah the daughter of Zechariah.
and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord
according to all that David his father had done.
he in the first year of his reign in the first month opened
the doors of the house of the lord and repaired them.
and he brought in the priests and the Levites and gathered
them together into the east street
and said unto them hear me ye Levites sanctify now
yourselves and sanctify the house of the lord God of your
fathers and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place.
for our fathers have trespassed and done that which was evil
in the eyes of the lord our God and have forsaken him and
have turned away their faces from the habitation of the lord
and turned their backs.
also they have shut up the doors of the porch and put out the
lamps and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings
in the holy place unto the God of Israel.
wherefore the wrath of the lord was upon Judah and Jerusalem
and he hath delivered them to trouble to astonishment and to
hissing as ye see with your eyes.
for lo our fathers have fallen by the sword and our sons
and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.
now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the lord God
of Israel that his fierce wrath may turn away from us.
my sons be not now negligent for the lord hath chosen you to
stand before him to serve him and that ye should minister
unto him and burn incense.
then the Levites arose Mahath the son of Amasai and Joel the
son of Azariah of the sons of the Kohathites and of the sons
of Merari Kish the son of Abdi and Azariah the son of
Jehalelel and of the Gershonites Joah the son of Zimmah and
Eden the son of Joah
and of the sons of Elizaphan Shimri and Jeiel and of the
sons of Asaph Zechariah and Mattaniah
and of the sons of Heman Jehiel and Shimei and of the sons
of Jeduthun Shemaiah and Uzziel.
and they gathered their brethren and sanctified themselves
and came according to the commandment of the king by the
words of the lord to cleanse the house of the lord.
and the priests went into the inner part of the house of the
lord to cleanse it and brought out all the uncleanness that
they found in the temple of the lord into the court of the
house of the lord. and the Levites took it to carry it out
abroad into the brook Kidron.
now they began on the first day of the first month to
sanctify and on the eighth day of the month came they to the
porch of the lord so they sanctified the house of the lord in
eight days and in the sixteenth day of the first month they
made an end.
then they went in to Hezekiah the king and said we have
cleansed all the house of the lord and the altar of burnt
offering with all the vessels thereof and the shewbread
table with all the vessels thereof.
moreover all the vessels which king Ahaz in his reign did
cast away in his transgression have we prepared and
sanctified and behold they are before the altar of the
lord.
then Hezekiah the king rose early and gathered the rulers of
the city and went up to the house of the lord.
and they brought seven bullocks and seven rams and seven
lambs and seven he goats for a Sin offering for the kingdom
and for the sanctuary and for Judah. and he commanded the
priests the sons of Aaron to offer them on the altar of the
lord.
so they killed the bullocks and the priests received the
blood and sprinkled it on the altar likewise when they had
killed the rams they sprinkled the blood upon the altar they
killed also the lambs and they sprinkled the blood upon the
altar.
and they brought forth the he goats for the Sin offering
before the king and the congregation and they laid their
hands upon them
and the priests killed them and they made reconciliation with
their blood upon the altar to make an atonement for all
Israel for the king commanded that the burnt offering and the
Sin offering should be made for all Israel.
and he set the Levites in the house of the lord with cymbals
with psalteries and with harps according to the commandment
of David and of Gad the king s seer and Nathan the prophet
for so was the commandment of the lord by his prophets.
and the Levites stood with the instruments of David and the
priests with the trumpets.
and Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering upon the
altar. and when the burnt offering began the song of the lord
began also with the trumpets and with the instruments
ordained by David king of Israel.
and all the congregation worshipped and the singers sang and
the trumpeters sounded and all this continued until the burnt
offering was finished.
and when they had made an end of offering the king and all
that were present with him bowed themselves and worshipped.
moreover Hezekiah the king and the princes commanded the
Levites to sing praise unto the lord with the words of David
and of Asaph the seer. and they sang praises with gladness
and they bowed their heads and worshipped.
then Hezekiah answered and said now ye have consecrated
yourselves unto the lord come near and bring sacrifices and
thank offerings into the house of the lord. and the
congregation brought in sacrifices and thank offerings and as
many as were of a free heart burnt offerings.
and the number of the burnt offerings which the congregation
brought was threescore and Ten bullocks an hundred rams and
two hundred lambs all these were for a burnt offering to the
lord.
and the consecrated things were six hundred oxen and three
thousand sheep.
but the priests were too few so that they could not flay all
the burnt offerings wherefore their brethren the Levites did
help them till the work was ended and until the other
priests had sanctified themselves for the Levites were more
upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.
and also the burnt offerings were in abundance with the fat
of the peace offerings and the drink offerings for every
burnt offering. so the service of the house of the lord was
set in order.
and Hezekiah rejoiced and all the people that God had
prepared the people for the thing was done suddenly.
and Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah and wrote letters
also to Ephraim and Manasseh that they should come to the
house of the lord at Jerusalem to keep the passover unto the
lord God of Israel.
for the king had taken counsel and his princes and all the
congregation in Jerusalem to keep the passover in the second
month.
for they could not keep it at that time because the priests
had not sanctified themselves sufficiently Neither had the
people gathered themselves together to Jerusalem.
and the thing pleased the king and all the congregation.
so they established a decree to make proclamation throughout
all Israel from Beersheba even to Dan that they should come
to keep the passover unto the lord God of Israel at Jerusalem
for they had not done it of a long time in such sort as it was
written.
so the posts went with the letters from the king and his
princes throughout all Israel and Judah and according to the
commandment of the king saying ye children of Israel turn
again unto the lord God of Abraham Isaac and Israel and he
will return to the remnant of you that are escaped out of the
hand of the kings of Assyria.
and be not ye like your fathers and like your brethren which
trespassed against the lord God of their fathers who
therefore gave them up to desolation as ye see.
now be ye not stiffnecked as your fathers were but yield
yourselves unto the lord and enter into his sanctuary which
he hath sanctified for ever and serve the lord your God that
the fierceness of his wrath may turn away from you.
for if ye turn again unto the lord your brethren and your
children shall find compassion before them that lead them
captive so that they shall come again into this land for the
lord your God is gracious and merciful and will not turn away
his face from you if ye return unto him.
so the posts passed from city to city through the country of
Ephraim and Manasseh even unto Zebulun but they laughed them
to scorn and mocked them.
nevertheless divers of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun
humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem.
also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart to do
the commandment of the king and of the princes by the word of
the lord.
and there assembled at Jerusalem Much people to keep the feast
of unleavened bread in the second month a very great
congregation.
and they arose and took away the altars that were in
Jerusalem and all the altars for incense took they away and
cast them into the brook Kidron.
then they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the
second month and the priests and the Levites were ashamed
and sanctified themselves and brought in the burnt offerings
into the house of the lord.
and they stood in their place after their manner according to
the law of Moses the man of God the priests sprinkled the
blood which they received of the hand of the Levites.
for there were many in the congregation that were not
sanctified therefore the Levites had the charge of the
killing of the passovers for every one that was not clean to
sanctify them unto the lord.
for a multitude of the people even many of Ephraim and
Manasseh Issachar and Zebulun had not cleansed themselves
yet did they eat the passover otherwise than it was written.
but Hezekiah prayed for them saying the good lord pardon
every one
that prepareth his heart to seek God the lord God of his
fathers though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the sanctuary.
and the lord hearkened to Hezekiah and healed the people.
and the children of Israel that were present at Jerusalem kept
the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness
and the Levites and the priests praised the lord day by day
singing with loud instruments unto the lord.
and Hezekiah spake comfortably unto all the Levites that
taught the good knowledge of the lord and they did eat
throughout the feast seven days offering peace offerings and
making confession to the lord God of their fathers.
and the whole assembly took counsel to keep other seven days
and they kept other seven days with gladness.
for Hezekiah king of Judah did give to the congregation a
thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep and the princes
gave to the congregation a thousand bullocks and Ten thousand
sheep and a great number of priests sanctified themselves.
and all the congregation of Judah with the priests and the
Levites and all the congregation that came out of Israel and
the strangers that came out of the land of Israel and that
dwelt in Judah rejoiced.
so there was great joy in Jerusalem for since the time of
Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was not the like
in Jerusalem.
then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people and
their voice was heard and their prayer came up to his holy
dwelling place even unto heaven.
now when all this was finished all Israel that were present
went out to the cities of Judah and brake the images in
pieces and cut down the groves and threw down the high
places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin in
Ephraim also and Manasseh until they had utterly destroyed
them all. then all the children of Israel returned every man
to his possession into their own cities.
and Hezekiah appointed the courses of the priests and the
Levites after their courses every man according to his
service the priests and Levites for burnt offerings and for
peace offerings to minister and to give thanks and to
praise in the gates of the tents of the lord.
he appointed also the king s portion of his substance for the
burnt offerings to wit for the morning and evening burnt
offerings and the burnt offerings for the sabbaths and for
the new moons and for the set feasts as it is written in the
law of the lord.
moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to
give the portion of the priests and the Levites that they
might be encouraged in the law of the lord.
and as soon as the commandment came abroad the children of
Israel brought in abundance the firstfruits of corn wine and
oil and honey and of all the increase of the field and the
tithe of all things brought they in abundantly.
and concerning the children of Israel and Judah that dwelt in
the cities of Judah they also brought in the tithe of oxen
and sheep and the tithe of holy things which were consecrated
unto the lord their God and laid them by heaps.
in the third month they began to lay the foundation of the
heaps and finished them in the seventh month.
and when Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps they
blessed the lord and his people Israel.
then Hezekiah questioned with the priests and the Levites
concerning the heaps.
and Azariah the chief priest of the house of Zadok answered
him and said since the people began to bring the offerings
into the house of the lord we have had enough to eat and
have left plenty for the lord hath blessed his people and
that which is left is this great store.
then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of
the lord and they prepared them
and brought in the offerings and the tithes and the dedicated
things faithfully over which Cononiah the Levite was ruler
and Shimei his brother was the next.
and Jehiel and Azaziah and Nahath and Asahel and Jerimoth
and Jozabad and Eliel and Ismachiah and Mahath and
Benaiah were overseers under the hand of Cononiah and Shimei
his brother at the commandment of Hezekiah the king and
Azariah the ruler of the house of God.
and Kore the son of Imnah the Levite the porter toward the
east was over the freewill offerings of God to distribute
the oblations of the lord and the most holy things.
and next him were Eden and Miniamin and Jeshua and
Shemaiah Amariah and Shecaniah in the cities of the
priests in their set office to give to their brethren by
courses as well to the great as to the small
beside their genealogy of males from three years old and
upward even unto every one that entereth into the house of
the lord his daily portion for their service in their charges
according to their courses
both to the genealogy of the priests by the house of their
fathers and the Levites from twenty years old and upward in
their charges by their courses
and to the genealogy of all their little ones their wives
and their sons and their daughters through all the
congregation for in their set office they sanctified
themselves in holiness
also of the sons of Aaron the priests which were in the
fields of the suburbs of their cities in every several city
the men that were expressed by name to give portions to all
the males among the priests and to all that were reckoned by
genealogies among the Levites.
and thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah and wrought that
which was good and right and truth before the lord his God.
and in every work that he began in the service of the house of
God and in the law and in the commandments to seek his God
he did it with all his heart and prospered.
after these things and the establishment thereof Sennacherib
king of Assyria came and entered into Judah and encamped
against the fenced cities and thought to win them for
himself.
and when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come and that he
was purposed to fight against Jerusalem
he took counsel with his princes and his Mighty men to stop
the waters of the fountains which were without the city and
they did help him.
so there was gathered Much people together who stopped all
the fountains and the brook that ran through the midst of the
land saying why should the kings of Assyria come and find
Much water?
also he strengthened himself and built up all the wall that
was broken and raised it up to the towers and another wall
without and repaired Millo in the city of David and made
darts and shields in abundance.
and he set captains of war over the people and gathered them
together to him in the street of the gate of the city and
spake comfortably to them saying
be strong and courageous be not afraid nor dismayed for the
king of Assyria nor for all the multitude that is with him
for there be more with us than with him
with him is an arm of flesh but with us is the lord our God
to help us and to fight our battles. and the people rested
themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.
after this did Sennacherib king of Assyria send his servants
to Jerusalem but he himself laid siege against Lachish and
all his power with him unto Hezekiah king of Judah and unto
all Judah that were at Jerusalem saying
thus saith Sennacherib king of Assyria whereon do ye trust
that ye abide in the siege in Jerusalem?
doth not Hezekiah persuade you to give over yourselves to die
by famine and by thirst saying the lord our God shall
deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
hath not the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his
altars and commanded Judah and Jerusalem saying ye shall
worship before one altar and burn incense upon it?
know ye not what I and my fathers have done unto all the
people of other lands? were the gods of the nations of those
lands any ways able to deliver their lands out of mine hand?
who was there among all the gods of those nations that my
fathers utterly destroyed that could deliver his people out
of mine hand that your God should be able to deliver you out
of mine hand?
now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you nor persuade you
on this manner Neither yet believe him for no God of any
nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of mine
hand and out of the hand of my fathers how Much less shall
your God deliver you out of mine hand?
and his servants spake yet more against the lord God and
against his servant Hezekiah.
he wrote also letters to rail on the lord God of Israel and
to speak against him saying as the gods of the nations of
other lands have not delivered their people out of mine hand
so shall not the God of Hezekiah deliver his people out of
mine hand.
then they cried with a loud voice in the Jews speech unto the
people of Jerusalem that were on the wall to affright them
and to trouble them that they might take the city.
and they spake against the God of Jerusalem as against the
gods of the people of the earth which were the work of the
hands of man.
and for this cause Hezekiah the king and the prophet Isaiah
the son of Amoz prayed and cried to heaven.
and the lord sent an angel which cut off all the Mighty men
of valour and the leaders and captains in the camp of the
king of Assyria. so he returned with shame of face to his own
land. and when he was come into the house of his God they
that came forth of his own bowels slew him there with the
sword.
thus the lord saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem
from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria and from the
hand of all other and guided them on every side.
and many brought gifts unto the lord to Jerusalem and
presents to Hezekiah king of Judah so that he was magnified
in the sight of all nations from thenceforth.
in those days Hezekiah was sick to the death and prayed unto
the lord and he spake unto him and he gave him a sign.
but Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done
unto him for his heart was lifted up therefore there was
wrath upon him and upon Judah and Jerusalem.
notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his
heart both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem so that the
wrath of the lord came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah.
and Hezekiah had exceeding Much Riches and honour and he made
himself treasuries for Silver and for gold and for precious
stones and for spices and for shields and for all manner of
pleasant jewels
storehouses also for the increase of corn and wine and oil
and stalls for all manner of beasts and cotes for flocks.
moreover he provided him cities and possessions of flocks and
herds in abundance for God had given him substance very Much.
this same Hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of
Gihon and brought it straight down to the west side of the
city of David. and Hezekiah prospered in all his works.
howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of
Babylon who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was
done in the land God left him to try him that he might know
all that was in his heart.
now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah and his goodness
behold they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet
the son of Amoz and in the book of the kings of Judah and
Israel.
and Hezekiah slept with his fathers and they buried him in
the chiefest of the sepulchres of the sons of David and all
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honour at his
death. and Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.
Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign and he
reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem
but did that which was evil in the sight of the lord like
unto the abominations of the heathen whom the lord had cast
out before the children of Israel.
for he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father
had broken down and he reared up altars for Baalim and made
groves and worshipped all the host of heaven and served
them.
also he built altars in the house of the lord whereof the
lord had said in Jerusalem shall my name be for ever.
and he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two
courts of the house of the lord.
and he caused his children to pass through the fire in the
valley of the son of Hinnom also he observed times and used
enchantments and used witchcraft and dealt with a familiar
spirit and with wizards he wrought Much evil in the sight of
the lord to provoke him to anger.
and he set a carved image the idol which he had made in the
house of God of which God had said to David and to Solomon
his son in this house and in Jerusalem which I have chosen
before all the tribes of Israel will I put my name for ever
Neither will I any more remove the foot of Israel from out of
the land which I have appointed for your fathers so that they
will take heed to do all that I have commanded them according
to the whole law and the statutes and the ordinances by the
hand of Moses.
so Manasseh made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to
err and to do worse than the heathen whom the lord had
destroyed before the children of Israel.
and the lord spake to Manasseh and to his people but they
would not hearken.
wherefore the lord brought upon them the captains of the host
of the king of Assyria which took Manasseh among the thorns
and bound him with fetters and carried him to Babylon.
and when he was in affliction he besought the lord his God
and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers
and prayed unto him and he was intreated of him and heard
his supplication and brought him again to Jerusalem into his
kingdom. then Manasseh knew that the lord he was God.
now after this he built a wall without the city of David on
the west side of Gihon in the valley even to the entering in
at the fish gate and compassed about Ophel and raised it up
a very great height and put captains of war in all the fenced
cities of Judah.
and he took away the strange gods and the idol out of the
house of the lord and all the altars that he had built in the
mount of the house of the lord and in Jerusalem and cast
them out of the city.
and he repaired the altar of the lord and sacrificed thereon
peace offerings and thank offerings and commanded Judah to
serve the lord God of Israel.
nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high
places yet unto the lord their God only.
now the rest of the acts of Manasseh and his prayer unto his
God and the words of the seers that spake to him in the name
of the lord God of Israel behold they are written in the
book of the kings of Israel.
his prayer also and how God was intreated of him and all his
sins and his trespass and the places wherein he built high
places and set up groves and graven images before he was
humbled behold they are written among the sayings of the
seers.
so Manasseh slept with his fathers and they buried him in his
own house and Amon his son reigned in his stead.
Amon was two and twenty years old when he began to reign and
reigned two years in Jerusalem.
but he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord as
did Manasseh his father for Amon sacrificed unto all the
carved images which Manasseh his father had made and served
them
and humbled not himself before the lord as Manasseh his
father had humbled himself but Amon trespassed more and more.
and his servants conspired against him and slew him in his
own house.
but the people of the land slew all them that had conspired
against king Amon and the people of the land made Josiah his
son king in his stead.
Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign and he
reigned in Jerusalem one and thirty years.
and he did that which was right in the sight of the lord and
walked in the ways of David his father and declined Neither
to the right hand nor to the left.
for in the eighth year of his reign while he was yet young
he began to seek after the God of David his father and in the
twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the
high places and the groves and the carved images and the
molten images.
and they brake down the altars of Baalim in his presence and
the images that were on high above them he cut down and the
groves and the carved images and the molten images he brake
in pieces and made dust of them and strowed it upon the
graves of them that had sacrificed unto them.
and he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars and
cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.
and so did he in the cities of Manasseh and Ephraim and
Simeon even unto Naphtali with their mattocks round about.
and when he had broken down the altars and the groves and had
beaten the graven images into powder and cut down all the
idols throughout all the land of Israel he returned to
Jerusalem.
now in the eighteenth year of his reign when he had purged
the land and the house he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah
and Maaseiah the Governor of the city and Joah the son of
Joahaz the recorder to repair the house of the lord his God.
and when they came to Hilkiah the high priest they delivered
the money that was brought into the house of God which the
Levites that kept the doors had gathered of the hand of
Manasseh and Ephraim and of all the remnant of Israel and of
all Judah and Benjamin and they returned to Jerusalem.
and they put it in the hand of the workmen that had the
oversight of the house of the lord and they gave it to the
workmen that wrought in the house of the lord to repair and
amend the house
even to the artificers and builders gave they it to buy hewn
stone and timber for couplings and to floor the houses which
the kings of Judah had destroyed.
and the men did the work faithfully and the overseers of them
were Jahath and Obadiah the Levites of the sons of Merari
and Zechariah and Meshullam of the sons of the Kohathites to
set it forward and other of the Levites all that could skill
of instruments of musick.
also they were over the bearers of burdens and were overseers
of all that wrought the work in any manner of service and of
the Levites there were scribes and officers and porters.
and when they brought out the money that was brought into the
house of the lord Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law
of the lord given by Moses.
and Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe I have
found the book of the law in the house of the lord. and
Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan.
and Shaphan carried the book to the king and brought the king
word back again saying all that was committed to thy
servants they do it.
and they have gathered together the money that was found in
the house of the lord and have delivered it into the hand of
the overseers and to the hand of the workmen.
then Shaphan the scribe told the king saying Hilkiah the
priest hath given me a book. and Shaphan read it before the
king.
and it came to pass when the king had heard the words of the
law that he rent his clothes.
and the king commanded Hilkiah and Ahikam the son of Shaphan
and Abdon the son of Micah and Shaphan the scribe and Asaiah
a servant of the king s saying
go enquire of the lord for me and for them that are left in
Israel and in Judah concerning the words of the book that is
found for great is the wrath of the lord that is poured out
upon us because our fathers have not kept the word of the
lord to do after all that is written in this book.
and Hilkiah and they that the king had appointed went to
Huldah the prophetess the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvath
the son of Hasrah keeper of the wardrobe now she dwelt in
Jerusalem in the college and they spake to her to that
effect.
and she answered them thus saith the lord God of Israel tell
ye the man that sent you to me
thus saith the lord behold I will bring evil upon this
place and upon the inhabitants thereof even all the curses
that are written in the book which they have read before the
king of Judah
because they have forsaken me and have burned incense unto
other gods that they might provoke me to anger with all the
works of their hands therefore my wrath shall be poured out
upon this place and shall not be quenched.
and as for the king of Judah who sent you to enquire of the
lord so shall ye say unto him thus saith the lord God of
Israel concerning the words which thou hast heard
because thine heart was tender and thou didst humble thyself
before God when thou heardest his words against this place
and against the inhabitants thereof and humbledst thyself
before me and didst rend thy clothes and weep before me I
have even heard thee also saith the lord.
behold I will gather thee to thy fathers and thou shalt be
gathered to thy grave in peace Neither shall thine eyes see
all the evil that I will bring upon this place and upon the
inhabitants of the same. so they brought the king word again.
then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of
Judah and Jerusalem.
and the king went up into the house of the lord and all the
men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem and the
priests and the Levites and all the people great and small
and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the
covenant that was found in the house of the lord.
and the king stood in his place and made a covenant before
the lord to walk after the lord and to keep his
commandments and his testimonies and his statutes with all
his heart and with all his soul to perform the words of the
covenant which are written in this book.
and he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin
to stand to it. and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according
to the covenant of God the God of their fathers.
and Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the
countries that pertained to the children of Israel and made
all that were present in Israel to serve even to serve the
lord their God. and all his days they departed not from
following the lord the God of their fathers.
moreover Josiah kept a passover unto the lord in Jerusalem
and they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the
first month.
and he set the priests in their charges and encouraged them
to the service of the house of the lord
and said unto the Levites that taught all Israel which were
holy unto the lord put the holy ark in the house which
Solomon the son of David king of Israel did build it shall
not be a burden upon your shoulders serve now the lord your
God and his people Israel
and prepare yourselves by the houses of your fathers after
your courses according to the writing of David king of
Israel and according to the writing of Solomon his son.
and stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the
families of the fathers of your brethren the people and after
the division of the families of the Levites.
so kill the passover and sanctify yourselves and prepare
your brethren that they may do according to the word of the
lord by the hand of Moses.
and Josiah gave to the people of the flock lambs and kids
all for the passover offerings for all that were present to
the number of thirty thousand and three thousand bullocks
these were of the king s substance.
and his princes gave willingly unto the people to the
priests and to the Levites Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel
rulers of the house of God gave unto the priests for the
passover offerings two thousand and six hundred small cattle
and three hundred oxen.
Conaniah also and Shemaiah and Nethaneel his brethren and
Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad chief of the Levites gave
unto the Levites for passover offerings five thousand small
cattle and five hundred oxen.
so the service was prepared and the priests stood in their
place and the Levites in their courses according to the
king s commandment.
and they killed the passover and the priests sprinkled the
blood from their hands and the Levites flayed them.
and they removed the burnt offerings that they might give
according to the divisions of the families of the people to
offer unto the lord as it is written in the book of Moses.
and so did they with the oxen.
and they roasted the passover with fire according to the
ordinance but the other holy offerings sod they in pots and
in caldrons and in pans and divided them speedily among all
the people.
and afterward they made ready for themselves and for the
priests because the priests the sons of Aaron were busied in
offering of burnt offerings and the fat until night therefore
the Levites prepared for themselves and for the priests the
sons of Aaron.
and the singers the sons of Asaph were in their place
according to the commandment of David and Asaph and Heman
and Jeduthun the king s seer and the porters waited at every
gate they might not depart from their service for their
brethren the Levites prepared for them.
so all the service of the lord was prepared the same day to
keep the passover and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar
of the lord according to the commandment of king Josiah.
and the children of Israel that were present kept the passover
at that time and the feast of unleavened bread seven days.
and there was no passover like to that kept in Israel from the
days of Samuel the prophet Neither did all the kings of
Israel keep such a passover as Josiah kept and the priests
and the Levites and all Judah and Israel that were present
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
in the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah was this
passover kept.
after all this when Josiah had prepared the temple Necho
king of Egypt came up to fight against Charchemish by
Euphrates and Josiah went out against him.
but he sent ambassadors to him saying what have I to do with
thee thou king of Judah? I come not against thee this day
but against the house wherewith I have war for God commanded
me to make haste forbear thee from meddling with God who is
with me that he destroy thee not.
nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him but
disguised himself that he might fight with him and hearkened
not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God and came to
fight in the valley of Megiddo.
and the archers shot at king Josiah and the king said to his
servants have me away for I Am sore wounded.
his servants therefore took him out of that chariot and put
him in the second chariot that he had and they brought him to
Jerusalem and he died and was buried in one of the
sepulchres of his fathers. and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned
for Josiah.
and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah and all the singing men and
the singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to
this day and made them an ordinance in Israel and behold
they are written in the lamentations.
now the rest of the acts of Josiah and his goodness
according to that which was written in the law of the lord
and his deeds first and last behold they are written in the
book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah
and made him king in his father s stead in Jerusalem.
Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to
reign and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.
and the king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem and condemned
the land in an hundred talents of Silver and a talent of gold.
and the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah
and Jerusalem and turned his name to Jehoiakim. and Necho
took Jehoahaz his brother and carried him to Egypt.
Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to
reign and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem and he did
that which was evil in the sight of the lord his God.
against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and bound
him in fetters to carry him to Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of the
lord to Babylon and put them in his temple at Babylon.
now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim and his abominations
which he did and that which was found in him behold they
are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah and
Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.
Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign and he
reigned three months and Ten days in Jerusalem and he did
that which was evil in the sight of the lord.
and when the year was expired king Nebuchadnezzar sent and
brought him to Babylon with the goodly vessels of the house
of the lord and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and
Jerusalem.
Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign
and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord his
God and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet
speaking from the mouth of the lord.
and he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar who had made
him swear by God but he stiffened his neck and hardened his
heart from turning unto the lord God of Israel.
moreover all the chief of the priests and the people
transgressed very Much after all the abominations of the
heathen and polluted the house of the lord which he had
hallowed in Jerusalem.
and the lord God of their fathers sent to them by his
messengers rising up betimes and sending because he had
compassion on his people and on his dwelling place
but they mocked the messengers of God and despised his words
and misused his prophets until the wrath of the lord arose
against his people till there was no remedy.
therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees who
slew their young men with the sword in the house of their
sanctuary and had no compassion upon young man or maiden old
man or him that stooped for age he gave them all into his
hand.
and all the vessels of the house of God great and small and
the treasures of the house of the lord and the treasures of
the king and of his princes all these he brought to Babylon.
and they burnt the house of God and brake down the wall of
Jerusalem and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire and
destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof.
and them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to
Babylon where they were servants to him and his sons until
the reign of the kingdom of Persia
to fulfil the word of the lord by the mouth of Jeremiah until
the land had enjoyed her sabbaths for as long as she lay
desolate she kept sabbath to fulfil threescore and Ten years.
now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia that the word
of the lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be
accomplished the lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of
Persia that he made a proclamation throughout all his
kingdom and put it also in writing saying
thus saith Cyrus king of Persia all the kingdoms of the earth
hath the lord God of heaven given me and he hath charged me
to build him an house in Jerusalem which is in Judah. who is
there among you of all his people? the lord his God be with
him and let him go up.
now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia that the word
of the lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled the
lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia that he
made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom and put it
also in writing saying
thus saith Cyrus king of Persia the lord God of heaven hath
given me all the kingdoms of the earth and he hath charged me
to build him an house at Jerusalem which is in Judah.
who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him
and let him go up to Jerusalem which is in Judah and build
the house of the lord God of Israel he is the God which is
in Jerusalem.
and whosoever remaineth in any place where he sojourneth let
the men of his place help him with Silver and with gold and
with goods and with beasts beside the freewill offering for
the house of God that is in Jerusalem.
then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin
and the priests and the Levites with all them whose spirit
God had raised to go up to build the house of the lord which
is in Jerusalem.
and all they that were about them strengthened their hands
with vessels of Silver with gold with goods and with
beasts and with precious things beside all that was
willingly offered.
also Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house of
the lord which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of
Jerusalem and had put them in the house of his gods
even those did Cyrus king of Persia bring forth by the hand of
Mithredath the treasurer and numbered them unto Sheshbazzar
the prince of Judah.
and this is the number of them thirty chargers of gold a
thousand chargers of Silver nine and twenty knives
thirty basons of gold Silver basons of a second sort four
hundred and Ten and other vessels a thousand.
all the vessels of gold and of Silver were five thousand and
four hundred. all these did Sheshbazzar bring up with them of
the captivity that were brought up from Babylon unto
Jerusalem.
now these are the children of the province that went up out of
the captivity of those which had been carried away whom
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away unto
Babylon and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah every one
unto his city
which came with Zerubbabel Jeshua Nehemiah Seraiah
Reelaiah Mordecai Bilshan Mizpar Bigvai Rehum Baanah.
the number of the men of the people of Israel
the children of Parosh two thousand an hundred seventy and
two.
the children of Shephatiah three hundred seventy and two.
the children of Arah seven hundred seventy and five.
the children of Pahathmoab of the children of Jeshua and
Joab two thousand eight hundred and twelve.
the children of Elam a thousand two hundred fifty and four.
the children of Zattu nine hundred forty and five.
the children of Zaccai seven hundred and threescore.
the children of Bani six hundred forty and two.
the children of Bebai six hundred twenty and three.
the children of Azgad a thousand two hundred twenty and two.
the children of Adonikam six hundred sixty and six.
the children of Bigvai two thousand fifty and six.
the children of Adin four hundred fifty and four.
the children of Ater of Hezekiah ninety and eight.
the children of Bezai three hundred twenty and three.
the children of Jorah an hundred and twelve.
the children of Hashum two hundred twenty and three.
the children of Gibbar ninety and five.
the children of Bethlehem an hundred twenty and three.
the men of Netophah fifty and six.
the men of Anathoth an hundred twenty and eight.
the children of Azmaveth forty and two.
the children of Kirjatharim Chephirah and Beeroth seven
hundred and forty and three.
the children of Ramah and Gaba six hundred twenty and one.
the men of Michmas an hundred twenty and two.
the men of Bethel and Ai two hundred twenty and three.
the children of Nebo fifty and two.
the children of Magbish an hundred fifty and six.
the children of the other Elam a thousand two hundred fifty
and four.
the children of Harim three hundred and twenty.
the children of Lod Hadid and Ono seven hundred twenty and
five.
the children of Jericho three hundred forty and five.
the children of Senaah three thousand and six hundred and
thirty.
the priests the children of Jedaiah of the house of Jeshua
nine hundred seventy and three.
the children of Immer a thousand fifty and two.
the children of Pashur a thousand two hundred forty and
seven.
the children of Harim a thousand and seventeen.
the Levites the children of Jeshua and Kadmiel of the
children of Hodaviah seventy and four.
the singers the children of Asaph an hundred twenty and
eight.
the children of the porters the children of Shallum the
children of Ater the children of Talmon the children of
Akkub the children of Hatita the children of Shobai in all
an hundred thirty and nine.
the Nethinims the children of Ziha the children of Hasupha
the children of Tabbaoth
the children of Keros the children of Siaha the children of
Padon
the children of Lebanah the children of Hagabah the children
of Akkub
the children of Hagab the children of Shalmai the children
of Hanan
the children of Giddel the children of Gahar the children of
Reaiah
the children of Rezin the children of Nekoda the children of
Gazzam
the children of Uzza the children of Paseah the children of
Besai
the children of Asnah the children of Mehunim the children
of Nephusim
the children of Bakbuk the children of Hakupha the children
of Harhur
the children of Bazluth the children of Mehida the children
of Harsha
the children of Barkos the children of Sisera the children
of Thamah
the children of Neziah the children of Hatipha.
the children of Solomon s servants the children of Sotai the
children of Sophereth the children of Peruda
the children of Jaalah the children of Darkon the children
of Giddel
the children of Shephatiah the children of Hattil the
children of Pochereth of Zebaim the children of Ami.
all the Nethinims and the children of Solomon s servants
were three hundred ninety and two.
and these were they which went up from Telmelah Telharsa
Cherub Addan and Immer but they could not shew their
father s house and their seed whether they were of Israel
the children of Delaiah the children of Tobiah the children
of Nekoda six hundred fifty and two.
and of the children of the priests the children of Habaiah
the children of Koz the children of Barzillai which took a
wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite and was
called after their name
these sought their register among those that were reckoned by
genealogy but they were not found therefore were they as
polluted put from the priesthood.
and the Tirshatha said unto them that they should not eat of
the most holy things till there stood up a priest with Urim
and with Thummim.
the whole congregation together was forty and two thousand
three hundred and threescore
beside their servants and their maids of whom there were
seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven and there were
among them two hundred singing men and singing women.
their horses were seven hundred thirty and six their mules
two hundred forty and five
their camels four hundred thirty and five their asses six
thousand seven hundred and twenty.
and some of the chief of the fathers when they came to the
house of the lord which is at Jerusalem offered freely for
the house of God to set it up in his place
they gave after their ability unto the treasure of the work
threescore and one thousand drams of gold and five thousand
pound of Silver and one hundred priests garments.
so the priests and the Levites and some of the people and
the singers and the porters and the Nethinims dwelt in
their cities and all Israel in their cities.
and when the seventh month was come and the children of
Israel were in the cities the people gathered themselves
together as one man to Jerusalem.
then stood up Jeshua the son of Jozadak and his brethren the
priests and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and his
brethren and builded the altar of the God of Israel to offer
burnt offerings thereon as it is written in the law of Moses
the man of God.
and they set the altar upon his bases for fear was upon them
because of the people of those countries and they offered
burnt offerings thereon unto the lord even burnt offerings
morning and evening.
they kept also the feast of tabernacles as it is written and
offered the daily burnt offerings by number according to the
custom as the duty of every day required
and afterward offered the continual burnt offering both of
the new moons and of all the set feasts of the lord that were
consecrated and of every one that willingly offered a
freewill offering unto the lord.
from the first day of the seventh month began they to offer
burnt offerings unto the lord. but the foundation of the
temple of the lord was not yet laid.
they gave money also unto the masons and to the carpenters
and meat and drink and oil unto them of Zidon and to them
of Tyre to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea of
Joppa according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of
Persia.
now in the second year of their coming unto the house of God
at Jerusalem in the second month began Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel and Jeshua the son of Jozadak and the remnant of
their brethren the priests and the Levites and all they that
were come out of the captivity unto Jerusalem and appointed
the Levites from twenty years old and upward to set forward
the work of the house of the lord.
then stood Jeshua with his sons and his brethren Kadmiel and
his sons the sons of Judah together to set forward the
workmen in the house of God the sons of Henadad with their
sons and their brethren the Levites.
and when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the
lord they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets and
the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals to praise the
lord after the ordinance of David king of Israel.
and they sang together by course in praising and giving thanks
unto the lord because he is good for his mercy endureth for
ever toward Israel. and all the people shouted with a great
shout when they praised the lord because the foundation of
the house of the lord was laid.
but many of the priests and Levites and chief of the fathers
who were ancient men that had seen the first house when the
foundation of this house was laid before their eyes wept with
a loud voice and many shouted aloud for joy
so that the people could not discern the noise of the shout of
joy from the noise of the weeping of the people for the
people shouted with a loud shout and the noise was heard afar
off.
now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the
children of the captivity builded the temple unto the lord God
of Israel
then they came to Zerubbabel and to the chief of the fathers
and said unto them let us build with you for we seek your
God as ye do and we do sacrifice unto him since the days of
Esarhaddon king of Assur which brought us up hither.
but Zerubbabel and Jeshua and the rest of the chief of the
fathers of Israel said unto them ye have nothing to do with
us to build an house unto our God but we ourselves together
will build unto the lord God of Israel as king Cyrus the king
of Persia hath commanded us.
then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people
of Judah and troubled them in building
and hired counsellors against them to frustrate their
purpose all the days of Cyrus king of Persia even until the
reign of Darius king of Persia.
and in the reign of Ahasuerus in the beginning of his reign
wrote they unto him an accusation against the inhabitants of
Judah and Jerusalem.
and in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam Mithredath
Tabeel and the rest of their companions unto Artaxerxes king
of Persia and the writing of the letter was written in the
Syrian tongue and interpreted in the Syrian tongue.
Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter
against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this sort
then wrote Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the scribe and
the rest of their companions the Dinaites the
Apharsathchites the Tarpelites the Apharsites the
Archevites the Babylonians the Susanchites the Dehavites
and the Elamites
and the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Asnapper
brought over and set in the cities of Samaria and the rest
that are on this side the river and at such a time.
this is the copy of the letter that they sent unto him even
unto Artaxerxes the king thy servants the men on this side
the river and at such a time.
be it known unto the king that the Jews which came up from
thee to us are come unto Jerusalem building the rebellious
and the bad city and have set up the walls thereof and
joined the foundations.
be it known now unto the king that if this city be builded
and the walls set up again then will they not pay toll
tribute and custom and so thou shalt endamage the revenue of
the kings.
now because we have maintenance from the king s palace and it
was not meet for us to see the king s dishonour therefore
have we sent and certified the king
that search may be made in the book of the records of thy
fathers so shalt thou find in the book of the records and
know that this city is a rebellious city and hurtful unto
kings and provinces and that they have moved sedition within
the same of old time for which cause was this city destroyed.
we certify the king that if this city be builded again and
the walls thereof set up by this means thou shalt have no
portion on this side the river.
then sent the king an answer unto Rehum the chancellor and to
Shimshai the scribe and to the rest of their companions that
dwell in Samaria and unto the rest beyond the river peace
and at such a time.
the letter which ye sent unto us hath been plainly read before
me.
and I commanded and search hath been made and it is found
that this city of old time hath made insurrection against
kings and that rebellion and sedition have been made therein.
there have been Mighty kings also over Jerusalem which have
ruled over all countries beyond the river and toll tribute
and custom was paid unto them.
give ye now commandment to cause these men to cease and that
this city be not builded until another commandment shall be
given from me.
take heed now that ye fail not to do this why should damage
grow to the hurt of the kings?
now when the copy of king Artaxerxes letter was read before
Rehum and Shimshai the scribe and their companions they
went up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews and made them to
cease by force and power.
then ceased the work of the house of God which is at
Jerusalem. so it ceased unto the second year of the reign of
Darius king of Persia.
then the prophets Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son
of Iddo prophesied unto the Jews that were in Judah and
Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel even unto them.
then rose up Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshua the
son of Jozadak and began to build the house of God which is
at Jerusalem and with them were the prophets of God helping
them.
at the same time came to them Tatnai Governor on this side
the river and Shetharboznai and their companions and said
thus unto them who hath commanded you to build this house
and to make up this wall?
then said we unto them after this manner what are the names
of the men that make this building?
but the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews that
they could not cause them to cease till the matter came to
Darius and then they returned answer by letter concerning
this matter.
the copy of the letter that Tatnai Governor on this side the
river and Shetharboznai and his companions the Apharsachites
which were on this side the river sent unto Darius the king
they sent a letter unto him wherein was written thus unto
Darius the king all peace.
be it known unto the king that we went into the province of
Judea to the house of the great God which is builded with
great stones and timber is laid in the walls and this work
goeth fast on and prospereth in their hands.
then asked we those elders and said unto them thus who
commanded you to build this house and to make up these walls?
we asked their names also to certify thee that we might
write the names of the men that were the chief of them.
and thus they returned us answer saying we are the servants
of the God of heaven and earth and build the house that was
builded these many years ago which a great king of Israel
builded and set up.
but after that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven unto
wrath he gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king
of Babylon the Chaldean who destroyed this house and
carried the people away into Babylon.
but in the first year of Cyrus the king of Babylon the same
king Cyrus made a decree to build this house of God.
and the vessels also of gold and Silver of the house of God
which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that was in
Jerusalem and brought them into the temple of Babylon those
did Cyrus the king take out of the temple of Babylon and they
were delivered unto one whose name was Sheshbazzar whom he
had made Governor
and said unto him take these vessels go carry them into the
temple that is in Jerusalem and let the house of God be
builded in his place.
then came the same Sheshbazzar and laid the foundation of the
house of God which is in Jerusalem and since that time even
until now hath it been in building and yet it is not
finished.
now therefore if it seem good to the king let there be
search made in the king s treasure house which is there at
Babylon whether it be so that a decree was made of Cyrus the
king to build this house of God at Jerusalem and let the king
send his pleasure to us concerning this matter.
then Darius the king made a decree and search was made in the
house of the rolls where the treasures were laid up in
Babylon.
and there was found at Achmetha in the palace that is in the
province of the Medes a roll and therein was a record thus
written
in the first year of Cyrus the king the same Cyrus the king
made a decree concerning the house of God at Jerusalem let
the house be builded the place where they offered sacrifices
and let the foundations thereof be strongly laid the height
thereof threescore cubits and the breadth thereof threescore
cubits
with three rows of great stones and a row of new timber and
let the expenses be given out of the king s house
and also let the golden and Silver vessels of the house of
God which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the temple which
is at Jerusalem and brought unto Babylon be restored and
brought again unto the temple which is at Jerusalem every one
to his place and place them in the house of God.
now therefore Tatnai Governor beyond the river
Shetharboznai and your companions the Apharsachites which
are beyond the river be ye far from thence
let the work of this house of God alone let the Governor of
the Jews and the elders of the Jews build this house of God in
his place.
moreover I make a decree what ye shall do to the elders of
these Jews for the building of this house of God that of the
king s goods even of the tribute beyond the river forthwith
expenses be given unto these men that they be not hindered.
and that which they have need of both young bullocks and
rams and lambs for the burnt offerings of the God of heaven
wheat salt wine and oil according to the appointment of
the priests which are at Jerusalem let it be given them day
by day without fail
that they may offer sacrifices of sweet savours unto the God
of heaven and pray for the life of the king and of his sons.
also I have made a decree that whosoever shall alter this
word let timber be pulled down from his house and being set
up let him be hanged thereon and let his house be made a
dunghill for this.
and the God that hath caused his name to dwell there destroy
all kings and people that shall put to their hand to alter
and to destroy this house of God which is at Jerusalem. I
Darius have made a decree let it be done with speed.
then Tatnai Governor on this side the river Shetharboznai
and their companions according to that which Darius the king
had sent so they did speedily.
and the elders of the Jews builded and they prospered through
the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of
Iddo. and they builded and finished it according to the
commandment of the God of Israel and according to the
commandment of Cyrus and Darius and Artaxerxes king of
Persia.
and this house was finished on the third day of the month
Adar which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the
king.
and the children of Israel the priests and the Levites and
the rest of the children of the captivity kept the dedication
of this house of God with joy.
and offered at the dedication of this house of God an hundred
bullocks two hundred rams four hundred lambs and for a Sin
offering for all Israel twelve he goats according to the
number of the tribes of Israel.
and they set the priests in their divisions and the Levites
in their courses for the service of God which is at
Jerusalem as it is written in the book of Moses.
and the children of the captivity kept the passover upon the
fourteenth day of the first month.
for the priests and the Levites were purified together all of
them were pure and killed the passover for all the children
of the captivity and for their brethren the priests and for
themselves.
and the children of Israel which were come again out of
captivity and all such as had separated themselves unto them
from the filthiness of the heathen of the land to seek the
lord God of Israel did eat
and kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy
for the lord had made them joyful and turned the heart of the
king of Assyria unto them to strengthen their hands in the
work of the house of God the God of Israel.
now after these things in the reign of Artaxerxes king of
Persia Ezra the son of Seraiah the son of Azariah the son
of Hilkiah
the son of Shallum the son of Zadok the son of Ahitub
the son of Amariah the son of Azariah the son of Meraioth
the son of Zerahiah the son of Uzzi the son of Bukki
the son of Abishua the son of Phinehas the son of Eleazar
the son of Aaron the chief priest
this Ezra went up from Babylon and he was a ready scribe in
the law of Moses which the lord God of Israel had given and
the king granted him all his request according to the hand of
the lord his God upon him.
and there went up some of the children of Israel and of the
priests and the Levites and the singers and the porters
and the Nethinims unto Jerusalem in the seventh year of
Artaxerxes the king.
and he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month which was in the
seventh year of the king.
for upon the first day of the first month began he to go up
from Babylon and on the first day of the fifth month came he
to Jerusalem according to the good hand of his God upon him.
for Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the law of the lord
and to do it and to teach in Israel statutes and judgments.
now this is the copy of the letter that the king Artaxerxes
gave unto Ezra the priest the scribe even a scribe of the
words of the commandments of the lord and of his statutes to
Israel.
Artaxerxes king of kings unto Ezra the priest a scribe of
the law of the God of heaven perfect peace and at such a
time.
I make a decree that all they of the people of Israel and of
his priests and Levites in my realm which are minded of
their own freewill to go up to Jerusalem go with thee.
forasmuch as thou art sent of the king and of his seven
counsellors to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem
according to the law of thy God which is in thine hand
and to carry the Silver and gold which the king and his
counsellors have freely offered unto the God of Israel whose
habitation is in Jerusalem
and all the Silver and gold that thou canst find in all the
province of Babylon with the freewill offering of the people
and of the priests offering willingly for the house of their
God which is in Jerusalem
that thou mayest buy speedily with this money bullocks rams
lambs with their meat offerings and their drink offerings
and offer them upon the altar of the house of your God which
is in Jerusalem.
and whatsoever shall seem good to thee and to thy brethren
to do with the rest of the Silver and the gold that do after
the will of your God.
the vessels also that are given thee for the service of the
house of thy God those deliver thou before the God of
Jerusalem.
and whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of thy God
which thou shalt have occasion to bestow bestow it out of the
king s treasure house.
and I even I Artaxerxes the king do make a decree to all the
treasurers which are beyond the river that whatsoever Ezra
the priest the scribe of the law of the God of heaven shall
require of you it be done speedily
unto an hundred talents of Silver and to an hundred measures
of wheat and to an hundred baths of wine and to an hundred
baths of oil and salt without prescribing how Much.
whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven let it be
diligently done for the house of the God of heaven for why
should there be wrath against the realm of the king and his
sons?
also we certify you that touching any of the priests and
Levites singers porters Nethinims or ministers of this
house of God it shall not be lawful to impose toll tribute
or custom upon them.
and thou Ezra after the wisdom of thy God that is in thine
hand set magistrates and judges which may judge all the
people that are beyond the river all such as know the laws of
thy God and teach ye them that know them not.
and whosoever will not do the law of thy God and the law of
the king let judgment be executed speedily upon him whether
it be unto death or to banishment or to confiscation of
goods or to imprisonment.
blessed be the lord God of our fathers which hath put such a
thing as this in the king s heart to beautify the house of
the lord which is in Jerusalem
and hath extended mercy unto me before the king and his
counsellors and before all the king s Mighty princes. and I
was strengthened as the hand of the lord my God was upon me
and I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with
me.
these are now the chief of their fathers and this is the
genealogy of them that went up with me from Babylon in the
reign of Artaxerxes the king.
of the sons of Phinehas Gershom of the sons of Ithamar
Daniel of the sons of David Hattush.
of the sons of Shechaniah of the sons of Pharosh Zechariah
and with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males an
hundred and fifty.
of the sons of Pahathmoab Elihoenai the son of Zerahiah and
with him two hundred males.
of the sons of Shechaniah the son of Jahaziel and with him
three hundred males.
of the sons also of Adin Ebed the son of Jonathan and with
him fifty males.
and of the sons of Elam Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah and
with him seventy males.
and of the sons of Shephatiah Zebadiah the son of Michael
and with him fourscore males.
of the sons of Joab Obadiah the son of Jehiel and with him
two hundred and eighteen males.
and of the sons of Shelomith the son of Josiphiah and with
him an hundred and threescore males.
and of the sons of Bebai Zechariah the son of Bebai and with
him twenty and eight males.
and of the sons of Azgad Johanan the son of Hakkatan and
with him an hundred and Ten males.
and of the last sons of Adonikam whose names are these
Eliphelet Jeiel and Shemaiah and with them threescore
males.
of the sons also of Bigvai Uthai and Zabbud and with them
seventy males.
and I gathered them together to the river that runneth to
Ahava and there abode we in tents three days and I viewed
the people and the priests and found there none of the sons
of Levi.
then sent I for Eliezer for Ariel for Shemaiah and for
Elnathan and for Jarib and for Elnathan and for Nathan and
for Zechariah and for Meshullam chief men also for Joiarib
and for Elnathan men of understanding.
and I sent them with commandment unto Iddo the chief at the
place Casiphia and I told them what they should say unto
Iddo and to his brethren the Nethinims at the place
Casiphia that they should bring unto us ministers for the
house of our God.
and by the good hand of our God upon us they brought us a man
of understanding of the sons of Mahli the son of Levi the
son of Israel and Sherebiah with his sons and his brethren
eighteen
and Hashabiah and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari
his brethren and their sons twenty
also of the Nethinims whom David and the princes had
appointed for the service of the Levites two hundred and
twenty Nethinims all of them were expressed by name.
then I proclaimed a fast there at the river of Ahava that we
might afflict ourselves before our God to seek of him a right
way for us and for our little ones and for all our
substance.
for I was ashamed to require of the king a band of soldiers
and horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way because
we had spoken unto the king saying the hand of our God is
upon all them for good that seek him but his power and his
wrath is against all them that forsake him.
so we fasted and besought our God for this and he was
intreated of us.
then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests
Sherebiah Hashabiah and Ten of their brethren with them
and weighed unto them the Silver and the gold and the
vessels even the offering of the house of our God which the
king and his counsellors and his lords and all Israel there
present had offered
I even weighed unto their hand six hundred and fifty talents
of Silver and Silver vessels an hundred talents and of gold
an hundred talents
also twenty basons of gold of a thousand drams and two
vessels of fine copper precious as gold.
and I said unto them ye are holy unto the lord the vessels
are holy also and the Silver and the gold are a freewill
offering unto the lord God of your fathers.
watch ye and keep them until ye weigh them before the chief
of the priests and the Levites and chief of the fathers of
Israel at Jerusalem in the chambers of the house of the
lord.
so took the priests and the Levites the weight of the Silver
and the gold and the vessels to bring them to Jerusalem unto
the house of our God.
then we departed from the river of Ahava on the twelfth day of
the first month to go unto Jerusalem and the hand of our God
was upon us and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy
and of such as lay in wait by the way.
and we came to Jerusalem and abode there three days.
now on the fourth day was the Silver and the gold and the
vessels weighed in the house of our God by the hand of
Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest and with him was Eleazar
the son of Phinehas and with them was Jozabad the son of
Jeshua and Noadiah the son of Binnui Levites
by number and by weight of every one and all the weight was
written at that time.
also the children of those that had been carried away which
were come out of the captivity offered burnt offerings unto
the God of Israel twelve bullocks for all Israel ninety and
six rams seventy and seven lambs twelve he goats for a Sin
offering all this was a burnt offering unto the lord.
and they delivered the king s commissions unto the king s
lieutenants and to the governors on this side the river and
they furthered the people and the house of God.
now when these things were done the princes came to me
saying the people of Israel and the priests and the
Levites have not separated themselves from the people of the
lands doing according to their abominations even of the
Canaanites the Hittites the Perizzites the Jebusites the
Ammonites the Moabites the Egyptians and the Amorites.
for they have taken of their daughters for themselves and for
their sons so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with
the people of those lands yea the hand of the princes and
rulers hath been chief in this trespass.
and when I heard this thing I rent my garment and my mantle
and plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard and sat
down astonied.
then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the
words of the God of Israel because of the transgression of
those that had been carried away and I sat astonied until the
evening sacrifice.
and at the evening sacrifice I arose up from my heaviness and
having rent my garment and my mantle I fell upon my knees
and spread out my hands unto the lord my God
and said O my God I Am ashamed and blush to lift up my face
to thee my God for our iniquities are increased over our
head and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens.
since the days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass
unto this day and for our iniquities have we our kings and
our priests been delivered into the hand of the kings of the
lands to the sword to captivity and to a spoil and to
confusion of face as it is this day.
and now for a little space grace hath been shewed from the
lord our God to leave us a remnant to escape and to give us
a nail in his holy place that our God may lighten our eyes
and give us a little reviving in our bondage.
for we were bondmen yet our God hath not forsaken us in our
bondage but hath extended mercy unto us in the sight of the
kings of Persia to give us a reviving to set up the house of
our God and to repair the desolations thereof and to give us
a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.
and now O our God what shall we say after this? for we have
forsaken thy commandments
which thou hast commanded by thy servants the prophets
saying the land unto which ye go to possess it is an
unclean land with the filthiness of the people of the lands
with their abominations which have filled it from one end to
another with their uncleanness.
now therefore give not your daughters unto their sons Neither
take their daughters unto your sons nor seek their peace or
their wealth for ever that ye may be strong and eat the good
of the land and leave it for an inheritance to your children
for ever.
and after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds and for
our great trespass seeing that thou our God hast punished us
less than our iniquities deserve and hast given us such
deliverance as this
should we again break thy commandments and join in affinity
with the people of these abominations? wouldest not thou be
angry with us till thou hadst consumed us so that there
should be no remnant nor escaping?
O lord God of Israel thou art righteous for we remain yet
escaped as it is this day behold we are before thee in our
trespasses for we cannot stand before thee because of this.
now when Ezra had prayed and when he had confessed weeping
and casting himself down before the house of God there
assembled unto him out of Israel a very great congregation of
men and women and children for the people wept very sore.
and Shechaniah the son of Jehiel one of the sons of Elam
answered and said unto Ezra we have trespassed against our
God and have taken strange wives of the people of the land
yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing.
now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away
all the wives and such as are born of them according to the
counsel of my lord and of those that tremble at the
commandment of our God and let it be done according to the
law.
Arise for this matter belongeth unto thee we also will be
with thee be of good courage and do it.
then arose Ezra and made the chief priests the Levites and
all Israel to swear that they should do according to this
word. and they sware.
then Ezra rose up from before the house of God and went into
the chamber of Johanan the son of Eliashib and when he came
thither he did eat no bread nor drink water for he mourned
because of the transgression of them that had been carried
away.
and they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto
all the children of the captivity that they should gather
themselves together unto Jerusalem
and that whosoever would not come within three days according
to the counsel of the princes and the elders all his
substance should be forfeited and himself separated from the
congregation of those that had been carried away.
then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves
together unto Jerusalem within three days. it was the ninth
month on the twentieth day of the month and all the people
sat in the street of the house of God trembling because of
this matter and for the great rain.
and Ezra the priest stood up and said unto them ye have
transgressed and have taken strange wives to increase the
trespass of Israel.
now therefore make confession unto the lord God of your
fathers and do his pleasure and separate yourselves from the
people of the land and from the strange wives.
then all the congregation answered and said with a loud voice
as thou hast said so must we do.
but the people are many and it is a time of Much rain and we
are not able to stand without Neither is this a work of one
day or two for we are many that have transgressed in this
thing.
let now our rulers of all the congregation stand and let all
them which have taken strange wives in our cities come at
appointed times and with them the elders of every city and
the judges thereof until the fierce wrath of our God for this
matter be turned from us.
only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahaziah the son of Tikvah
were employed about this matter and Meshullam and Shabbethai
the Levite helped them.
and the children of the captivity did so. and Ezra the priest
with certain chief of the fathers after the house of their
fathers and all of them by their names were separated and
sat down in the first day of the tenth month to examine the
matter.
and they made an end with all the men that had taken strange
wives by the first day of the first month.
and among the sons of the priests there were found that had
taken strange wives namely of the sons of Jeshua the son of
Jozadak and his brethren Maaseiah and Eliezer and Jarib
and Gedaliah.
and they gave their hands that they would put away their
wives and being guilty they offered a Ram of the flock for
their trespass.
and of the sons of Immer Hanani and Zebadiah.
and of the sons of Harim Maaseiah and Elijah and Shemaiah
and Jehiel and Uzziah.
and of the sons of Pashur Elioenai Maaseiah Ishmael
Nethaneel Jozabad and Elasah.
also of the Levites Jozabad and Shimei and Kelaiah the
same is Kelita Pethahiah Judah and Eliezer.
of the singers also Eliashib and of the porters Shallum
and Telem and Uri.
moreover of Israel of the sons of Parosh Ramiah and Jeziah
and Malchiah and Miamin and Eleazar and Malchijah and
Benaiah.
and of the sons of Elam Mattaniah Zechariah and Jehiel and
Abdi and Jeremoth and Eliah.
and of the sons of Zattu Elioenai Eliashib Mattaniah and
Jeremoth and Zabad and Aziza.
of the sons also of Bebai Jehohanan Hananiah Zabbai and
Athlai.
and of the sons of Bani Meshullam Malluch and Adaiah
Jashub and Sheal and Ramoth.
and of the sons of Pahathmoab Adna and Chelal Benaiah
Maaseiah Mattaniah Bezaleel and Binnui and Manasseh.
and of the sons of Harim Eliezer Ishijah Malchiah
Shemaiah Shimeon
Benjamin Malluch and Shemariah.
of the sons of Hashum Mattenai Mattathah Zabad Eliphelet
Jeremai Manasseh and Shimei.
of the sons of Bani Maadai Amram and Uel
Benaiah Bedeiah Chelluh
Vaniah Meremoth Eliashib
Mattaniah Mattenai and Jaasau
and Bani and Binnui Shimei
and Shelemiah and Nathan and Adaiah
Machnadebai Shashai Sharai
Azareel and Shelemiah Shemariah
Shallum Amariah and Joseph.
of the sons of Nebo Jeiel Mattithiah Zabad Zebina Jadau
and Joel Benaiah.
all these had taken strange wives and some of them had wives
by whom they had children.
the words of Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah. and it came to
pass in the month Chisleu in the twentieth year as I was in
Shushan the palace
that Hanani one of my brethren came he and certain men of
Judah and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped
which were left of the captivity and concerning Jerusalem.
and they said unto me the remnant that are left of the
captivity there in the province are in great affliction and
reproach the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down and the
gates thereof are burned with fire.
and it came to pass when I heard these words that I sat down
and wept and mourned certain days and fasted and prayed
before the God of heaven
and said I beseech thee O lord God of heaven the great and
terrible God that keepeth covenant and mercy for them that
love him and observe his commandments
let thine ear now be attentive and thine eyes open that thou
mayest hear the prayer of thy servant which I pray before
thee now day and night for the children of Israel thy
servants and confess the sins of the children of Israel
which we have sinned against thee both I and my father s
house have sinned.
we have dealt very corruptly against thee and have not kept
the commandments nor the statutes nor the judgments which
thou commandedst thy servant Moses.
remember I beseech thee the word that thou commandedst thy
servant Moses saying if ye transgress I will scatter you
abroad among the nations
but if ye turn unto me and keep my commandments and do them
though there were of you cast out unto the uttermost part of
the heaven yet will I gather them from thence and will bring
them unto the place that I have chosen to set my name there.
now these are thy servants and thy people whom thou hast
redeemed by thy great power and by thy strong hand.
O lord I beseech thee let now thine ear be attentive to the
prayer of thy servant and to the prayer of thy servants who
desire to fear thy name and prosper I pray thee thy servant
this day and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. for I
was the king s cupbearer.
and it came to pass in the month Nisan in the twentieth year
of Artaxerxes the king that wine was before him and I took
up the wine and gave it unto the king. now I had not been
beforetime sad in his presence.
wherefore the king said unto me why is thy countenance sad
seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of
heart. then I was very sore afraid
and said unto the king let the king live for ever why should
not my countenance be sad when the city the place of my
fathers sepulchres lieth waste and the gates thereof are
consumed with fire?
then the king said unto me for what dost thou make request?
so I prayed to the God of heaven.
and I said unto the king if it please the king and if thy
servant have found favour in thy sight that thou wouldest
send me unto Judah unto the city of my fathers sepulchres
that I may build it.
and the king said unto me the queen also sitting by him
for how long shall thy journey be? and when wilt thou return?
so it pleased the king to send me and I set him a time.
moreover I said unto the king if it please the king let
letters be given me to the governors beyond the river that
they may convey me over till I come into Judah
and a letter unto Asaph the keeper of the king s forest that
he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the
palace which appertained to the house and for the wall of the
city and for the house that I shall enter into. and the king
granted me according to the good hand of my God upon me.
then I came to the governors beyond the river and gave them
the king s letters. now the king had sent captains of the army
and horsemen with me.
when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the servant the
Ammonite heard of it it grieved them exceedingly that there
was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel.
so I came to Jerusalem and was there three days.
and I arose in the night I and some few men with me Neither
told I any man what my God had put in my heart to do at
Jerusalem Neither was there any beast with me save the beast
that I rode upon.
and I went out by night by the gate of the valley even before
the dragon well and to the dung port and viewed the walls of
Jerusalem which were broken down and the gates thereof were
consumed with fire.
then I went on to the gate of the fountain and to the king s
pool but there was no place for the beast that was under me
to pass.
then went I up in the night by the brook and viewed the wall
and turned back and entered by the gate of the valley and so
returned.
and the rulers knew not whither I went or what I did Neither
had I as yet told it to the Jews nor to the priests nor to
the nobles nor to the rulers nor to the rest that did the
work.
then said I unto them ye see the distress that we are in how
Jerusalem lieth waste and the gates thereof are burned with
fire come and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem that we
be no more a reproach.
then I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me
as also the king s words that he had spoken unto me. and they
said let us rise up and build. so they strengthened their
hands for this good work.
but when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the servant the
Ammonite and Geshem the Arabian heard it they laughed us to
scorn and despised us and said what is this thing that ye
do? will ye rebel against the king?
then answered I them and said unto them the God of heaven
he will prosper us therefore we his servants will Arise and
build but ye have no portion nor right nor memorial in
Jerusalem.
then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the
priests and they builded the sheep gate they sanctified it
and set up the doors of it even unto the tower of Meah they
sanctified it unto the tower of Hananeel.
and next unto him builded the men of Jericho. and next to them
builded Zaccur the son of Imri.
but the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build who also
laid the beams thereof and set up the doors thereof the
locks thereof and the bars thereof.
and next unto them repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah the
son of Koz. and next unto them repaired Meshullam the son of
Berechiah the son of Meshezabeel. and next unto them repaired
Zadok the son of Baana.
and next unto them the Tekoites repaired but their nobles put
not their necks to the work of their lord.
moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada the son of Paseah and
Meshullam the son of Besodeiah they laid the beams thereof
and set up the doors thereof and the locks thereof and the
bars thereof.
and next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite and Jadon
the Meronothite the men of Gibeon and of Mizpah unto the
throne of the Governor on this side the river.
next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah of the
goldsmiths. next unto him also repaired Hananiah the son of
one of the apothecaries and they fortified Jerusalem unto the
broad wall.
and next unto them repaired Rephaiah the son of Hur the ruler
of the half part of Jerusalem.
and next unto them repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph even
over against his house. and next unto him repaired Hattush the
son of Hashabniah.
Malchijah the son of Harim and Hashub the son of Pahathmoab
repaired the other piece and the tower of the furnaces.
and next unto him repaired Shallum the son of Halohesh the
ruler of the half part of Jerusalem he and his daughters.
the valley gate repaired Hanun and the inhabitants of Zanoah
they built it and set up the doors thereof the locks
thereof and the bars thereof and a thousand cubits on the
wall unto the dung gate.
but the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab the
ruler of part of Bethhaccerem he built it and set up the
doors thereof the locks thereof and the bars thereof.
but the gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the son of
Colhozeh the ruler of part of Mizpah he built it and
covered it and set up the doors thereof the locks thereof
and the bars thereof and the wall of the pool of Siloah by
the king s garden and unto the stairs that go down from the
city of David.
after him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk the ruler of the
half part of Bethzur unto the place over against the
sepulchres of David and to the pool that was made and unto
the house of the Mighty.
after him repaired the Levites Rehum the son of Bani. next
unto him repaired Hashabiah the ruler of the half part of
Keilah in his part.
after him repaired their brethren Bavai the son of Henadad
the ruler of the half part of Keilah.
and next to him repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua the ruler of
Mizpah another piece over against the going up to the armoury
at the turning of the wall.
after him Baruch the son of Zabbai earnestly repaired the
other piece from the turning of the wall unto the door of the
house of Eliashib the high priest.
after him repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah the son of Koz
another piece from the door of the house of Eliashib even to
the end of the house of Eliashib.
and after him repaired the priests the men of the plain.
after him repaired Benjamin and Hashub over against their
house. after him repaired Azariah the son of Maaseiah the son
of Ananiah by his house.
after him repaired Binnui the son of Henadad another piece
from the house of Azariah unto the turning of the wall even
unto the corner.
Palal the son of Uzai over against the turning of the wall
and the tower which lieth out from the king s high house that
was by the court of the prison. after him Pedaiah the son of
Parosh.
moreover the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel unto the place over
against the water gate toward the east and the tower that
lieth out.
after them the Tekoites repaired another piece over against
the great tower that lieth out even unto the wall of Ophel.
from above the horse gate repaired the priests every one over
against his house.
after them repaired Zadok the son of Immer over against his
house. after him repaired also Shemaiah the son of Shechaniah
the keeper of the east gate.
after him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah and Hanun
the sixth son of Zalaph another piece. after him repaired
Meshullam the son of Berechiah over against his chamber.
after him repaired Malchiah the goldsmith s son unto the place
of the Nethinims and of the merchants over against the gate
Miphkad and to the going up of the corner.
and between the going up of the corner unto the sheep gate
repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants.
but it came to pass that when Sanballat heard that we builded
the wall he was wroth and took great indignation and mocked
the Jews.
and he spake before his brethren and the army of Samaria and
said what do these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves?
will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will they
revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are
burned?
now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him and he said even that
which they build if a fox go up he shall even break down
their stone wall.
hear O our God for we are despised and turn their reproach
upon their own head and give them for a prey in the land of
captivity
and cover not their iniquity and let not their Sin be blotted
out from before thee for they have provoked thee to anger
before the builders.
so built we the wall and all the wall was joined together
unto the half thereof for the people had a mind to work.
but it came to pass that when Sanballat and Tobiah and the
Arabians and the Ammonites and the Ashdodites heard that
the walls of Jerusalem were made up and that the breaches
began to be stopped then they were very wroth
and conspired all of them together to come and to fight
against Jerusalem and to hinder it.
nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God and set a watch
against them day and night because of them.
and Judah said the strength of the bearers of burdens is
decayed and there is Much rubbish so that we are not able to
build the wall.
and our adversaries said they shall not know Neither see
till we come in the midst among them and slay them and cause
the work to cease.
and it came to pass that when the Jews which dwelt by them
came they said unto us Ten times from all places whence ye
shall return unto us they will be upon you.
therefore set I in the lower places behind the wall and on
the higher places I even set the people after their families
with their swords their spears and their bows.
and I looked and rose up and said unto the nobles and to
the rulers and to the rest of the people be not ye afraid of
them remember the lord which is great and terrible and
fight for your brethren your sons and your daughters your
wives and your houses.
and it came to pass when our enemies heard that it was known
unto us and God had brought their counsel to nought that we
returned all of us to the wall every one unto his work.
and it came to pass from that time forth that the half of my
servants wrought in the work and the other half of them held
both the spears the shields and the bows and the
habergeons and the rulers were behind all the house of Judah.
they which builded on the wall and they that bare burdens
with those that laded every one with one of his hands wrought
in the work and with the other hand held a weapon.
for the builders every one had his sword girded by his side
and so builded. and he that sounded the trumpet was by me.
and I said unto the nobles and to the rulers and to the rest
of the people the work is great and large and we are
separated upon the wall one far from another.
in what place therefore ye hear the sound of the trumpet
resort ye thither unto us our God shall fight for us.
so we laboured in the work and half of them held the spears
from the rising of the morning till the stars appeared.
likewise at the same time said I unto the people let every
one with his servant lodge within Jerusalem that in the night
they may be a guard to us and labour on the day.
so Neither I nor my brethren nor my servants nor the men of
the guard which followed me none of us put off our clothes
saving that every one put them off for washing.
and there was a great cry of the people and of their wives
against their brethren the Jews.
for there were that said we our sons and our daughters are
many therefore we take up corn for them that we may eat and
live.
some also there were that said we have mortgaged our lands
vineyards and houses that we might buy corn because of the
dearth.
there were also that said we have borrowed money for the
king s tribute and that upon our lands and vineyards.
yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren our
children as their children and lo we bring into bondage our
sons and our daughters to be servants and some of our
daughters are brought unto bondage already Neither is it in
our power to redeem them for other men have our lands and
vineyards.
and I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words.
then I consulted with myself and I rebuked the nobles and
the rulers and said unto them ye exact usury every one of
his brother. and I set a great assembly against them.
and I said unto them we after our ability have redeemed our
brethren the Jews which were sold unto the heathen and will
ye even sell your brethren? or shall they be sold unto us?
then held they their peace and found nothing to answer.
also I said it is not good that ye do ought ye not to walk
in the fear of our God because of the reproach of the heathen
our enemies?
I likewise and my brethren and my servants might exact of
them money and corn I pray you let us leave off this usury.
restore I pray you to them even this day their lands
their vineyards their oliveyards and their houses also the
hundredth part of the money and of the corn the wine and
the oil that ye exact of them.
then said they we will restore them and will require nothing
of them so will we do as thou sayest. then I called the
priests and took an oath of them that they should do
according to this promise.
also I shook my lap and said so God shake out every man from
his house and from his labour that performeth not this
promise even thus be he shaken out and emptied. and all the
congregation said Amen and praised the lord. and the people
did according to this promise.
moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their
Governor in the land of Judah from the twentieth year even
unto the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king that
is twelve years I and my brethren have not eaten the bread
of the Governor.
but the former governors that had been before me were
chargeable unto the people and had taken of them bread and
wine beside forty shekels of Silver yea even their servants
bare rule over the people but so did not I because of the
fear of God.
yea also I continued in the work of this wall Neither bought
we any land and all my servants were gathered thither unto
the work.
moreover there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the
Jews and rulers beside those that came unto us from among the
heathen that are about us.
now that which was prepared for me daily was one ox and six
choice sheep also fowls were prepared for me and once in Ten
days store of all sorts of wine yet for all this required not
I the bread of the Governor because the bondage was heavy
upon this people.
think upon me my God for good according to all that I have
done for this people.
now it came to pass when Sanballat and Tobiah and Geshem the
Arabian and the rest of our enemies heard that I had builded
the wall and that there was no breach left therein though
at that time I had not set up the doors upon the gates
that Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me saying come let us
meet together in some one of the villages in the plain of Ono.
but they thought to do me mischief.
and I sent messengers unto them saying I Am doing a great
work so that I cannot come down why should the work cease
whilst I leave it and come down to you?
yet they sent unto me four times after this sort and I
answered them after the same manner.
then sent Sanballat his servant unto me in like manner the
fifth time with an open letter in his hand
wherein was written it is reported among the heathen and
Gashmu saith it that thou and the Jews think to rebel for
which cause thou buildest the wall that thou mayest be their
king according to these words.
and thou hast also appointed prophets to preach of thee at
Jerusalem saying there is a king in Judah and now shall it
be reported to the king according to these words. come now
therefore and let us take counsel together.
then I sent unto him saying there are no such things done as
thou sayest but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.
for they all made us afraid saying their hands shall be
weakened from the work that it be not done. now therefore O
God strengthen my hands.
afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah
the son of Mehetabeel who was shut up and he said let us
meet together in the house of God within the temple and let
us shut the doors of the temple for they will come to slay
thee yea in the night will they come to slay thee.
and I said should such a man as I flee? and who is there
that being as I Am would go into the temple to save his
life? I will not go in.
and lo I perceived that God had not sent him but that he
pronounced this prophecy against me for Tobiah and Sanballat
had hired him.
therefore was he hired that I should be afraid and do so
and Sin and that they might have matter for an evil report
that they might reproach me.
my God think thou upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to
these their works and on the prophetess Noadiah and the rest
of the prophets that would have put me in fear.
so the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the
month Elul in fifty and two days.
and it came to pass that when all our enemies heard thereof
and all the heathen that were about us saw these things they
were Much cast down in their own eyes for they perceived that
this work was wrought of our God.
moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters
unto Tobiah and the letters of Tobiah came unto them.
for there were many in Judah sworn unto him because he was
the son in law of Shechaniah the son of Arah and his son
Johanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of
Berechiah.
also they reported his good deeds before me and uttered my
words to him. and Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.
now it came to pass when the wall was built and I had set up
the doors and the porters and the singers and the Levites
were appointed
that I gave my brother Hanani and Hananiah the ruler of the
palace charge over Jerusalem for he was a faithful man and
feared God above many.
and I said unto them let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened
until the sun be hot and while they stand by let them shut
the doors and bar them and appoint watches of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem every one in his watch and every
one to be over against his house.
now the city was large and great but the people were few
therein and the houses were not builded.
and my God put into mine heart to gather together the nobles
and the rulers and the people that they might be reckoned by
genealogy. and I found a register of the genealogy of them
which came up at the first and found written therein
these are the children of the province that went up out of
the captivity of those that had been carried away whom
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away and came
again to Jerusalem and to Judah every one unto his city
who came with Zerubbabel Jeshua Nehemiah Azariah Raamiah
Nahamani Mordecai Bilshan Mispereth Bigvai Nehum Baanah.
the number I say of the men of the people of Israel was
this
the children of Parosh two thousand an hundred seventy and
two.
the children of Shephatiah three hundred seventy and two.
the children of Arah six hundred fifty and two.
the children of Pahathmoab of the children of Jeshua and
Joab two thousand and eight hundred and eighteen.
the children of Elam a thousand two hundred fifty and four.
the children of Zattu eight hundred forty and five.
the children of Zaccai seven hundred and threescore.
the children of Binnui six hundred forty and eight.
the children of Bebai six hundred twenty and eight.
the children of Azgad two thousand three hundred twenty and
two.
the children of Adonikam six hundred threescore and seven.
the children of Bigvai two thousand threescore and seven.
the children of Adin six hundred fifty and five.
the children of Ater of Hezekiah ninety and eight.
the children of Hashum three hundred twenty and eight.
the children of Bezai three hundred twenty and four.
the children of Hariph an hundred and twelve.
the children of Gibeon ninety and five.
the men of Bethlehem and Netophah an hundred fourscore and
eight.
the men of Anathoth an hundred twenty and eight.
the men of Bethazmaveth forty and two.
the men of Kirjathjearim Chephirah and Beeroth seven
hundred forty and three.
the men of Ramah and Gaba six hundred twenty and one.
the men of Michmas an hundred and twenty and two.
the men of Bethel and Ai an hundred twenty and three.
the men of the other Nebo fifty and two.
the children of the other Elam a thousand two hundred fifty
and four.
the children of Harim three hundred and twenty.
the children of Jericho three hundred forty and five.
the children of Lod Hadid and Ono seven hundred twenty and
one.
the children of Senaah three thousand nine hundred and
thirty.
the priests the children of Jedaiah of the house of Jeshua
nine hundred seventy and three.
the children of Immer a thousand fifty and two.
the children of Pashur a thousand two hundred forty and
seven.
the children of Harim a thousand and seventeen.
the Levites the children of Jeshua of Kadmiel and of the
children of Hodevah seventy and four.
the singers the children of Asaph an hundred forty and
eight.
the porters the children of Shallum the children of Ater
the children of Talmon the children of Akkub the children of
Hatita the children of Shobai an hundred thirty and eight.
the Nethinims the children of Ziha the children of Hashupha
the children of Tabbaoth
the children of Keros the children of Sia the children of
Padon
the children of Lebana the children of Hagaba the children
of Shalmai
the children of Hanan the children of Giddel the children of
Gahar
the children of Reaiah the children of Rezin the children of
Nekoda
the children of Gazzam the children of Uzza the children of
Phaseah
the children of Besai the children of Meunim the children of
Nephishesim
the children of Bakbuk the children of Hakupha the children
of Harhur
the children of Bazlith the children of Mehida the children
of Harsha
the children of Barkos the children of Sisera the children
of Tamah
the children of Neziah the children of Hatipha.
the children of Solomon s servants the children of Sotai the
children of Sophereth the children of Perida
the children of Jaala the children of Darkon the children of
Giddel
the children of Shephatiah the children of Hattil the
children of Pochereth of Zebaim the children of Amon.
all the Nethinims and the children of Solomon s servants
were three hundred ninety and two.
and these were they which went up also from Telmelah
Telharesha Cherub Addon and Immer but they could not shew
their father s house nor their seed whether they were of
Israel.
the children of Delaiah the children of Tobiah the children
of Nekoda six hundred forty and two.
and of the priests the children of Habaiah the children of
Koz the children of Barzillai which took one of the
daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite to wife and was called
after their name.
these sought their register among those that were reckoned by
genealogy but it was not found therefore were they as
polluted put from the priesthood.
and the Tirshatha said unto them that they should not eat of
the most holy things till there stood up a priest with Urim
and Thummim.
the whole congregation together was forty and two thousand
three hundred and threescore
beside their manservants and their maidservants of whom there
were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven and they
had two hundred forty and five singing men and singing women.
their horses seven hundred thirty and six their mules two
hundred forty and five
their camels four hundred thirty and five six thousand seven
hundred and twenty asses.
and some of the chief of the fathers gave unto the work. the
Tirshatha gave to the treasure a thousand drams of gold fifty
basons five hundred and thirty priests garments.
and some of the chief of the fathers gave to the treasure of
the work twenty thousand drams of gold and two thousand and
two hundred pound of Silver.
and that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand
drams of gold and two thousand pound of Silver and
threescore and seven priests garments.
so the priests and the Levites and the porters and the
singers and some of the people and the Nethinims and all
Israel dwelt in their cities and when the seventh month
came the children of Israel were in their cities.
and all the people gathered themselves together as one man
into the street that was before the water gate and they spake
unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses
which the lord had commanded to Israel.
and Ezra the priest brought the law before the congregation
both of men and women and all that could hear with
understanding upon the first day of the seventh month.
and he read therein before the street that was before the
water gate from the morning until midday before the men and
the women and those that could understand and the ears of
all the people were attentive unto the book of the law.
and Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood which they
had made for the purpose and beside him stood Mattithiah and
Shema and Anaiah and Urijah and Hilkiah and Maaseiah on
his right hand and on his left hand Pedaiah and Mishael
and Malchiah and Hashum and Hashbadana Zechariah and
Meshullam.
and Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people for
he was above all the people and when he opened it all the
people stood up
and Ezra blessed the lord the great God. and all the people
answered Amen Amen with lifting up their hands and they
bowed their heads and worshipped the lord with their faces to
the ground.
also Jeshua and Bani and Sherebiah Jamin Akkub
Shabbethai Hodijah Maaseiah Kelita Azariah Jozabad
Hanan Pelaiah and the Levites caused the people to
understand the law and the people stood in their place.
so they read in the book in the law of God distinctly and
gave the sense and caused them to understand the reading.
and Nehemiah which is the Tirshatha and Ezra the priest the
scribe and the Levites that taught the people said unto all
the people this day is holy unto the lord your God mourn
not nor weep. for all the people wept when they heard the
words of the law.
then he said unto them go your way eat the fat and drink
the sweet and send portions unto them for whom nothing is
prepared for this day is holy unto our lord Neither be ye
sorry for the joy of the lord is your strength.
so the Levites stilled all the people saying hold your
peace for the day is holy Neither be ye grieved.
and all the people went their way to eat and to drink and to
send portions and to make great mirth because they had
understood the words that were declared unto them.
and on the second day were gathered together the chief of the
fathers of all the people the priests and the Levites unto
Ezra the scribe even to understand the words of the law.
and they found written in the law which the lord had commanded
by Moses that the children of Israel should dwell in booths
in the feast of the seventh month
and that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities
and in Jerusalem saying go forth unto the mount and fetch
olive branches and pine branches and myrtle branches and
palm branches and branches of thick trees to make booths as
it is written.
so the people went forth and brought them and made
themselves booths every one upon the roof of his house and
in their courts and in the courts of the house of God and in
the street of the water gate and in the street of the gate of
Ephraim.
and all the congregation of them that were come again out of
the captivity made booths and sat under the booths for since
the days of Jeshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the
children of Israel done so. and there was very great gladness.
also day by day from the first day unto the last day he read
in the book of the law of God. and they kept the feast seven
days and on the eighth day was a solemn assembly according
unto the manner.
now in the twenty and fourth day of this month the children of
Israel were assembled with fasting and with sackclothes and
earth upon them.
and the seed of Israel separated themselves from all
strangers and stood and confessed their sins and the
iniquities of their fathers.
and they stood up in their place and read in the book of the
law of the lord their God one fourth part of the day and
another fourth part they confessed and worshipped the lord
their God.
then stood up upon the stairs of the Levites Jeshua and
Bani Kadmiel Shebaniah Bunni Sherebiah Bani and Chenani
and cried with a loud voice unto the lord their God.
then the Levites Jeshua and Kadmiel Bani Hashabniah
Sherebiah Hodijah Shebaniah and Pethahiah said stand up
and bless the lord your God for ever and ever and blessed be
thy glorious name which is exalted above all blessing and
praise.
thou even thou art lord alone thou hast made heaven the
heaven of heavens with all their host the earth and all
things that are therein the seas and all that is therein
and thou preservest them all and the host of heaven
worshippeth thee.
thou art the lord the God who didst choose Abram and
broughtest him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees and Gavest him
the name of Abraham
and foundest his heart faithful before thee and madest a
covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanites the
Hittites the Amorites and the Perizzites and the Jebusites
and the Girgashites to give it I say to his seed and hast
performed thy words for thou art righteous
and didst see the affliction of our fathers in Egypt and
heardest their cry by the red sea
and shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh and on all his
servants and on all the people of his land for thou knewest
that they dealt proudly against them. so didst thou get thee a
name as it is this day.
and thou didst divide the sea before them so that they went
through the midst of the sea on the dry land and their
persecutors thou threwest into the deeps as a stone into the
Mighty waters.
moreover thou leddest them in the day by a cloudy pillar and
in the night by a pillar of fire to give them light in the
way wherein they should go.
thou camest down also upon mount Sinai and spakest with them
from heaven and Gavest them right judgments and true laws
good statutes and commandments
and madest known unto them thy holy sabbath and commandedst
them precepts statutes and laws by the hand of Moses thy
servant
and Gavest them bread from heaven for their hunger and
broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for their
thirst and promisedst them that they should go in to possess
the land which thou hadst sworn to give them.
but they and our fathers dealt proudly and hardened their
necks and hearkened not to thy commandments
and refused to obey Neither were mindful of thy wonders that
thou didst among them but hardened their necks and in their
rebellion appointed a captain to return to their bondage but
thou art a God ready to pardon gracious and merciful slow to
anger and of great kindness and forsookest them not.
yea when they had made them a molten calf and said this is
thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt and had wrought
great provocations
yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them not in the
wilderness the pillar of the cloud departed not from them by
day to lead them in the way Neither the pillar of fire by
night to shew them light and the way wherein they should go.
thou Gavest also thy good spirit to instruct them and
withheldest not thy Manna from their mouth and Gavest them
water for their thirst.
yea forty years didst thou sustain them in the wilderness so
that they lacked nothing their clothes waxed not old and
their feet swelled not.
moreover thou Gavest them kingdoms and nations and didst
divide them into corners so they possessed the land of Sihon
and the land of the king of Heshbon and the land of Og king
of Bashan.
their children also multipliedst thou as the stars of heaven
and broughtest them into the land concerning which thou hadst
promised to their fathers that they should go in to possess
it.
so the children went in and possessed the land and thou
subduedst before them the inhabitants of the land the
Canaanites and Gavest them into their hands with their
kings and the people of the land that they might do with
them as they would.
and they took strong cities and a fat land and possessed
houses full of all goods wells digged vineyards and
oliveyards and fruit trees in abundance so they did eat and
were filled and became fat and delighted themselves in thy
great goodness.
nevertheless they were disobedient and rebelled against thee
and cast thy law behind their backs and slew thy prophets
which testified against them to turn them to thee and they
wrought great provocations.
therefore thou deliveredst them into the hand of their
enemies who vexed them and in the time of their trouble
when they cried unto thee thou heardest them from heaven and
according to thy manifold mercies thou Gavest them saviours
who saved them out of the hand of their enemies.
but after they had rest they did evil again before thee
therefore leftest thou them in the land of their enemies so
that they had the dominion over them yet when they returned
and cried unto thee thou heardest them from heaven and many
times didst thou deliver them according to thy mercies
and testifiedst against them that thou mightest bring them
again unto thy law yet they dealt proudly and hearkened not
unto thy commandments but sinned against thy judgments
 which if a man do he shall live in them and withdrew the
shoulder and hardened their neck and would not hear.
yet many years didst thou forbear them and testifiedst
against them by thy spirit in thy prophets yet would they not
give ear therefore Gavest thou them into the hand of the
people of the lands.
nevertheless for thy great mercies sake thou didst not
utterly consume them nor forsake them for thou art a
gracious and merciful God.
now therefore our God the great the Mighty and the
terrible God who keepest covenant and mercy let not all the
trouble seem little before thee that hath come upon us on
our kings on our princes and on our priests and on our
prophets and on our fathers and on all thy people since the
time of the kings of Assyria unto this day.
howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us for thou
hast done right but we have done wickedly
Neither have our kings our princes our priests nor our
fathers kept thy law nor hearkened unto thy commandments and
thy testimonies wherewith thou didst testify against them.
for they have not served thee in their kingdom and in thy
great goodness that thou Gavest them and in the large and fat
land which thou Gavest before them Neither turned they from
their wicked works.
behold we are servants this day and for the land that thou
Gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof and the good
thereof behold we are servants in it
and it yieldeth Much increase unto the kings whom thou hast
set over us because of our sins also they have dominion over
our bodies and over our cattle at their pleasure and we are
in great distress.
and because of all this we make a sure covenant and write it
and our princes Levites and priests seal unto it.
now those that sealed were Nehemiah the Tirshatha the son
of Hachaliah and Zidkijah
Seraiah Azariah Jeremiah
Pashur Amariah Malchijah
Hattush Shebaniah Malluch
Harim Meremoth Obadiah
Daniel Ginnethon Baruch
Meshullam Abijah Mijamin
Maaziah Bilgai Shemaiah these were the priests.
and the Levites both Jeshua the son of Azaniah Binnui of the
sons of Henadad Kadmiel
and their brethren Shebaniah Hodijah Kelita Pelaiah
Hanan
Micha Rehob Hashabiah
Zaccur Sherebiah Shebaniah
Hodijah Bani Beninu.
the chief of the people Parosh Pahathmoab Elam Zatthu
Bani
Bunni Azgad Bebai
Adonijah Bigvai Adin
Ater Hizkijah Azzur
Hodijah Hashum Bezai
Hariph Anathoth Nebai
Magpiash Meshullam Hezir
Meshezabeel Zadok Jaddua
Pelatiah Hanan Anaiah
Hoshea Hananiah Hashub
Hallohesh Pileha Shobek
Rehum Hashabnah Maaseiah
and Ahijah Hanan Anan
Malluch Harim Baanah.
and the rest of the people the priests the Levites the
porters the singers the Nethinims and all they that had
separated themselves from the people of the lands unto the law
of God their wives their sons and their daughters every
one having knowledge and having understanding
they clave to their brethren their nobles and entered into a
curse and into an oath to walk in God s law which was given
by Moses the servant of God and to observe and do all the
commandments of the lord our lord and his judgments and his
statutes
and that we would not give our daughters unto the people of
the land not take their daughters for our sons
and if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on
the sabbath day to sell that we would not buy it of them on
the sabbath or on the holy day and that we would leave the
seventh year and the exaction of every debt.
also we made ordinances for us to charge ourselves yearly
with the third part of a shekel for the service of the house
of our God
for the shewbread and for the continual meat offering and
for the continual burnt offering of the sabbaths of the new
moons for the set feasts and for the holy things and for
the Sin offerings to make an atonement for Israel and for all
the work of the house of our God.
and we cast the lots among the priests the Levites and the
people for the wood offering to bring it into the house of
our God after the houses of our fathers at times appointed
year by year to burn upon the altar of the lord our God as
it is written in the law
and to bring the firstfruits of our ground and the
firstfruits of all fruit of all trees year by year unto the
house of the lord
also the firstborn of our sons and of our cattle as it is
written in the law and the firstlings of our herds and of our
flocks to bring to the house of our God unto the priests
that minister in the house of our God
and that we should bring the firstfruits of our dough and our
offerings and the fruit of all manner of trees of wine and
of oil unto the priests to the chambers of the house of our
God and the tithes of our ground unto the Levites that the
same Levites might have the tithes in all the cities of our
tillage.
and the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites
when the Levites take tithes and the Levites shall bring up
the tithe of the tithes unto the house of our God to the
chambers into the treasure house.
for the children of Israel and the children of Levi shall
bring the offering of the corn of the new wine and the oil
unto the chambers where are the vessels of the sanctuary and
the priests that minister and the porters and the singers
and we will not forsake the house of our God.
and the rulers of the people dwelt at Jerusalem the rest of
the people also cast lots to bring one of Ten to dwell in
Jerusalem the holy city and nine parts to dwell in other
cities.
and the people blessed all the men that willingly offered
themselves to dwell at Jerusalem.
now these are the chief of the province that dwelt in
Jerusalem but in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his
possession in their cities to wit Israel the priests and
the Levites and the Nethinims and the children of Solomon s
servants.
and at Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah and
of the children of Benjamin. of the children of Judah Athaiah
the son of Uzziah the son of Zechariah the son of Amariah
the son of Shephatiah the son of Mahalaleel of the children
of Perez
and Maaseiah the son of Baruch the son of Colhozeh the son
of Hazaiah the son of Adaiah the son of Joiarib the son of
Zechariah the son of Shiloni.
all the sons of Perez that dwelt at Jerusalem were four
hundred threescore and eight valiant men.
and these are the sons of Benjamin Sallu the son of
Meshullam the son of Joed the son of Pedaiah the son of
Kolaiah the son of Maaseiah the son of Ithiel the son of
Jesaiah.
and after him Gabbai Sallai nine hundred twenty and eight.
and Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer and Judah the
son of Senuah was second over the city.
of the priests Jedaiah the son of Joiarib Jachin.
Seraiah the son of Hilkiah the son of Meshullam the son of
Zadok the son of Meraioth the son of Ahitub was the ruler
of the house of God.
and their brethren that did the work of the house were eight
hundred twenty and two and Adaiah the son of Jeroham the son
of Pelaliah the son of Amzi the son of Zechariah the son of
Pashur the son of Malchiah.
and his brethren chief of the fathers two hundred forty and
two and Amashai the son of Azareel the son of Ahasai the
son of Meshillemoth the son of Immer
and their brethren Mighty men of valour an hundred twenty
and eight and their overseer was Zabdiel the son of one of
the great men.
also of the Levites Shemaiah the son of Hashub the son of
Azrikam the son of Hashabiah the son of Bunni
and Shabbethai and Jozabad of the chief of the Levites had
the oversight of the outward business of the house of God.
and Mattaniah the son of Micha the son of Zabdi the son of
Asaph was the principal to begin the thanksgiving in prayer
and Bakbukiah the second among his brethren and Abda the son
of Shammua the son of Galal the son of Jeduthun.
all the Levites in the holy city were two hundred fourscore
and four.
moreover the porters Akkub Talmon and their brethren that
kept the gates were an hundred seventy and two.
and the residue of Israel of the priests and the Levites
were in all the cities of Judah every one in his inheritance.
but the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel and Ziha and Gispa were over
the Nethinims.
the overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son
of Bani the son of Hashabiah the son of Mattaniah the son
of Micha. of the sons of Asaph the singers were over the
business of the house of God.
for it was the king s commandment concerning them that a
certain portion should be for the singers due for every day.
and Pethahiah the son of Meshezabeel of the children of Zerah
the son of Judah was at the king s hand in all matters
concerning the people.
and for the villages with their fields some of the children
of Judah dwelt at Kirjatharba and in the villages thereof
and at Dibon and in the villages thereof and at Jekabzeel
and in the villages thereof
and at Jeshua and at Moladah and at Bethphelet
and at Hazarshual and at Beersheba and in the villages
thereof
and at Ziklag and at Mekonah and in the villages thereof
and at Enrimmon and at Zareah and at Jarmuth
Zanoah Adullam and in their villages at Lachish and the
fields thereof at Azekah and in the villages thereof. and
they dwelt from Beersheba unto the valley of Hinnom.
the children also of Benjamin from Geba dwelt at Michmash and
Aija and Bethel and in their villages.
and at Anathoth Nob Ananiah
Hazor Ramah Gittaim
Hadid Zeboim Neballat
Lod and Ono the valley of craftsmen.
and of the Levites were divisions in Judah and in Benjamin.
now these are the priests and the Levites that went up with
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshua Seraiah
Jeremiah Ezra
Amariah Malluch Hattush
Shechaniah Rehum Meremoth
Iddo Ginnetho Abijah
Miamin Maadiah Bilgah
Shemaiah and Joiarib Jedaiah
Sallu Amok Hilkiah Jedaiah. these were the chief of the
priests and of their brethren in the days of Jeshua.
moreover the Levites Jeshua Binnui Kadmiel Sherebiah
Judah and Mattaniah which was over the thanksgiving he and
his brethren.
also Bakbukiah and Unni their brethren were over against
them in the watches.
and Jeshua begat Joiakim Joiakim also begat Eliashib and
Eliashib begat Joiada
and Joiada begat Jonathan and Jonathan begat Jaddua.
and in the days of Joiakim were priests the chief of the
fathers of Seraiah Meraiah of Jeremiah Hananiah
of Ezra Meshullam of Amariah Jehohanan
of Melicu Jonathan of Shebaniah Joseph
of Harim Adna of Meraioth Helkai
of Iddo Zechariah of Ginnethon Meshullam
of Abijah Zichri of Miniamin of Moadiah Piltai
of Bilgah Shammua of Shemaiah Jehonathan
and of Joiarib Mattenai of Jedaiah Uzzi
of Sallai Kallai of Amok Eber
of Hilkiah Hashabiah of Jedaiah Nethaneel.
the Levites in the days of Eliashib Joiada and Johanan and
Jaddua were recorded chief of the fathers also the priests
to the reign of Darius the Persian.
the sons of Levi the chief of the fathers were written in
the book of the chronicles even until the days of Johanan the
son of Eliashib.
and the chief of the Levites Hashabiah Sherebiah and Jeshua
the son of Kadmiel with their brethren over against them to
praise and to give thanks according to the commandment of
David the man of God ward over against ward.
Mattaniah and Bakbukiah Obadiah Meshullam Talmon Akkub
were porters keeping the ward at the thresholds of the gates.
these were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua the son
of Jozadak and in the days of Nehemiah the Governor and of
Ezra the priest the scribe.
and at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the
Levites out of all their places to bring them to Jerusalem
to keep the dedication with gladness both with thanksgivings
and with singing with cymbals psalteries and with harps.
and the sons of the singers gathered themselves together both
out of the plain country round about Jerusalem and from the
villages of Netophathi
also from the house of Gilgal and out of the fields of Geba
and Azmaveth for the singers had builded them villages round
about Jerusalem.
and the priests and the Levites purified themselves and
purified the people and the gates and the wall.
then I brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall and
appointed two great companies of them that gave thanks
whereof one went on the right hand upon the wall toward the
dung gate
and after them went Hoshaiah and half of the princes of
Judah
and Azariah Ezra and Meshullam
Judah and Benjamin and Shemaiah and Jeremiah
and certain of the priests sons with trumpets namely
Zechariah the son of Jonathan the son of Shemaiah the son of
Mattaniah the son of Michaiah the son of Zaccur the son of
Asaph
and his brethren Shemaiah and Azarael Milalai Gilalai
Maai Nethaneel and Judah Hanani with the musical
instruments of David the man of God and Ezra the scribe
before them.
and at the fountain gate which was over against them they
went up by the stairs of the city of David at the going up of
the wall above the house of David even unto the water gate
eastward.
and the other company of them that gave thanks went over
against them and I after them and the half of the people
upon the wall from beyond the tower of the furnaces even unto
the broad wall
and from above the gate of Ephraim and above the old gate
and above the fish gate and the tower of Hananeel and the
tower of Meah even unto the sheep gate and they stood still
in the prison gate.
so stood the two companies of them that gave thanks in the
house of God and I and the half of the rulers with me
and the priests Eliakim Maaseiah Miniamin Michaiah
Elioenai Zechariah and Hananiah with trumpets
and Maaseiah and Shemaiah and Eleazar and Uzzi and
Jehohanan and Malchijah and Elam and Ezer. and the singers
sang loud with Jezrahiah their overseer.
also that day they offered great sacrifices and rejoiced for
God had made them rejoice with great joy the wives also and
the children rejoiced so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard
even afar off.
and at that time were some appointed over the chambers for the
treasures for the offerings for the firstfruits and for the
tithes to gather into them out of the fields of the cities
the portions of the law for the priests and Levites for Judah
rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites that waited.
and both the singers and the porters kept the ward of their
God and the ward of the purification according to the
commandment of David and of Solomon his son.
for in the days of David and Asaph of old there were chief of
the singers and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto God.
and all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel and in the days of
Nehemiah gave the portions of the singers and the porters
every day his portion and they sanctified holy things unto
the Levites and the Levites sanctified them unto the children
of Aaron.
on that day they read in the book of Moses in the audience of
the people and therein was found written that the Ammonite
and the Moabite should not come into the congregation of God
for ever
because they met not the children of Israel with bread and
with water but hired Balaam against them that he should
curse them howbeit our God turned the curse into a blessing.
now it came to pass when they had heard the law that they
separated from Israel all the mixed multitude.
and before this Eliashib the priest having the oversight of
the chamber of the house of our God was allied unto Tobiah
and he had prepared for him a great chamber where aforetime
they laid the meat offerings the frankincense and the
vessels and the tithes of the corn the new wine and the
oil which was commanded to be given to the Levites and the
singers and the porters and the offerings of the priests.
but in all this time was not I at Jerusalem for in the two
and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon came I unto
the king and after certain days obtained I leave of the king
and I came to Jerusalem and understood of the evil that
Eliashib did for Tobiah in preparing him a chamber in the
courts of the house of God.
and it grieved me sore therefore I cast forth all the
household stuff to Tobiah out of the chamber.
then I commanded and they cleansed the chambers and thither
brought I again the vessels of the house of God with the meat
offering and the frankincense.
and I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been
given them for the Levites and the singers that did the
work were fled every one to his field.
then contended I with the rulers and said why is the house
of God forsaken? and I gathered them together and set them in
their place.
then brought all Judah the tithe of the corn and the new wine
and the oil unto the treasuries.
and I made treasurers over the treasuries Shelemiah the
priest and Zadok the scribe and of the Levites Pedaiah and
next to them was Hanan the son of Zaccur the son of
Mattaniah for they were counted faithful and their office
was to distribute unto their brethren.
remember me O my God concerning this and wipe not out my
good deeds that I have done for the house of my God and for
the offices thereof.
in those days saw I in Judah some treading wine presses on the
sabbath and bringing in sheaves and lading asses as also
wine grapes and figs and all manner of burdens which they
brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day and I testified
against them in the day wherein they sold victuals.
there dwelt men of Tyre also therein which brought fish and
all manner of ware and sold on the sabbath unto the children
of Judah and in Jerusalem.
then I contended with the nobles of Judah and said unto them
what evil thing is this that ye do and profane the sabbath
day?
did not your fathers thus and did not our God bring all this
evil upon us and upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon
Israel by profaning the sabbath.
and it came to pass that when the gates of Jerusalem began to
be dark before the sabbath I commanded that the gates should
be shut and charged that they should not be opened till after
the sabbath and some of my servants set I at the gates that
there should no burden be brought in on the sabbath day.
so the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged
without Jerusalem once or twice.
then I testified against them and said unto them why lodge
ye about the wall? if ye do so again I will lay hands on you.
from that time forth came they no more on the sabbath.
and I commanded the Levites that they should cleanse
themselves and that they should come and keep the gates to
sanctify the sabbath day. remember me O my God concerning
this also and spare me according to the greatness of thy
mercy.
in those days also saw I Jews that had married wives of
Ashdod of Ammon and of Moab
and their children spake half in the speech of Ashdod and
could not speak in the Jews language but according to the
language of each people.
and I contended with them and cursed them and smote certain
of them and plucked off their hair and made them swear by
God saying ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons
nor take their daughters unto your sons or for yourselves.
did not Solomon king of Israel Sin by these things? yet among
many nations was there no king like him who was beloved of
his God and God made him king over all Israel nevertheless
even him did outlandish women cause to Sin.
shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil to
transgress against our God in marrying strange wives?
and one of the sons of Joiada the son of Eliashib the high
priest was son in law to Sanballat the Horonite therefore I
chased him from me.
remember them O my God because they have defiled the
priesthood and the covenant of the priesthood and of the
Levites.
thus cleansed I them from all strangers and appointed the
wards of the priests and the Levites every one in his
business
and for the wood offering at times appointed and for the
firstfruits. remember me O my God for good.
now it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus this is
Ahasuerus which reigned from India even unto Ethiopia over
an hundred and seven and twenty provinces
that in those days when the king Ahasuerus sat on the throne
of his kingdom which was in Shushan the palace
in the third year of his reign he made a feast unto all his
princes and his servants the power of Persia and Media the
nobles and princes of the provinces being before him
when he shewed the Riches of his glorious kingdom and the
honour of his excellent majesty many days even an hundred and
fourscore days.
and when these days were expired the king made a feast unto
all the people that were present in Shushan the palace both
unto great and small seven days in the court of the garden
of the king s palace
where were white green and blue hangings fastened with
cords of fine linen and purple to Silver rings and pillars of
marble the beds were of gold and Silver upon a pavement of
red and blue and white and black marble.
and they gave them drink in vessels of gold the vessels
being diverse one from another and royal wine in abundance
according to the state of the king.
and the drinking was according to the law none did compel
for so the king had appointed to all the officers of his
house that they should do according to every man s pleasure.
also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women in the royal
house which belonged to king Ahasuerus.
on the seventh day when the heart of the king was merry with
wine he commanded Mehuman Biztha Harbona Bigtha and
Abagtha Zethar and Carcas the seven chamberlains that
served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king
to bring Vashti the queen before the king with the crown
royal to shew the people and the princes her beauty for she
was fair to look on.
but the queen Vashti refused to come at the king s commandment
by his chamberlains therefore was the king very wroth and
his anger burned in him.
then the king said to the wise men which knew the times for
so was the king s manner toward all that knew law and
judgment
and the next unto him was Carshena Shethar Admatha
Tarshish Meres Marsena and Memucan the seven princes of
Persia and Media which saw the king s face and which sat the
first in the kingdom
what shall we do unto the queen Vashti according to law
because she hath not performed the commandment of the king
Ahasuerus by the chamberlains?
and Memucan answered before the king and the princes Vashti
the queen hath not done wrong to the king only but also to
all the princes and to all the people that are in all the
provinces of the king Ahasuerus.
for this deed of the queen shall come abroad unto all women
so that they shall despise their husbands in their eyes when
it shall be reported the king Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the
queen to be brought in before him but she came not.
likewise shall the ladies of Persia and Media say this day
unto all the king s princes which have heard of the deed of
the queen. thus shall there Arise too Much contempt and wrath.
if it please the king let there go a royal commandment from
him and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and
the Medes that it be not altered that Vashti come no more
before king Ahasuerus and let the king give her royal estate
unto another that is better than she.
and when the king s decree which he shall make shall be
published throughout all his empire for it is great all
the wives shall give to their husbands honour both to great
and small.
and the saying pleased the king and the princes and the king
did according to the word of Memucan
for he sent letters into all the king s provinces into every
province according to the writing thereof and to every people
after their language that every man should bear rule in his
own house and that it should be published according to the
language of every people.
after these things when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was
appeased he remembered Vashti and what she had done and
what was decreed against her.
then said the king s servants that ministered unto him let
there be fair young virgins sought for the king
and let the king appoint officers in all the provinces of his
kingdom that they may gather together all the fair young
virgins unto Shushan the palace to the house of the women
unto the custody of Hege the king s chamberlain keeper of the
women and let their things for purification be given them
and let the maiden which pleaseth the king be queen instead of
Vashti. and the thing pleased the king and he did so.
now in Shushan the palace there was a certain Jew whose name
was Mordecai the son of Jair the son of Shimei the son of
Kish a Benjamite
who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captivity
which had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah whom
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away.
and he brought up Hadassah that is Esther his uncle s
daughter for she had Neither father nor mother and the maid
was fair and beautiful whom Mordecai when her father and
mother were dead took for his own daughter.
so it came to pass when the king s commandment and his decree
was heard and when many maidens were gathered together unto
Shushan the palace to the custody of Hegai that Esther was
brought also unto the king s house to the custody of Hegai
keeper of the women.
and the maiden pleased him and she obtained kindness of him
and he speedily gave her her things for purification with
such things as belonged to her and seven maidens which were
meet to be given her out of the king s house and he
preferred her and her maids unto the best place of the house
of the women.
Esther had not shewed her people nor her kindred for Mordecai
had charged her that she should not shew it.
and Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women s
house to know how Esther did and what should become of her.
now when every maid s turn was come to go in to king
Ahasuerus after that she had been twelve months according to
the manner of the women for so were the days of their
purifications accomplished to wit six months with oil of
myrrh and six months with sweet odours and with other things
for the purifying of the women
then thus came every maiden unto the king whatsoever she
desired was given her to go with her out of the house of the
women unto the king s house.
in the evening she went and on the morrow she returned into
the second house of the women to the custody of Shaashgaz
the king s chamberlain which kept the concubines she came in
unto the king no more except the king delighted in her and
that she were called by name.
now when the turn of Esther the daughter of Abihail the uncle
of Mordecai who had taken her for his daughter was come to
go in unto the king she required nothing but what Hegai the
king s chamberlain the keeper of the women appointed. and
Esther obtained favour in the sight of all them that looked
upon her.
so Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus into his house royal
in the tenth month which is the month Tebeth in the seventh
year of his reign.
and the king loved Esther above all the women and she
obtained grace and favour in his sight more than all the
virgins so that he set the royal crown upon her head and
made her queen instead of Vashti.
then the king made a great feast unto all his princes and his
servants even Esther s feast and he made a release to the
provinces and gave gifts according to the state of the king.
and when the virgins were gathered together the second time
then Mordecai sat in the king s gate.
Esther had not yet shewed her kindred nor her people as
Mordecai had charged her for Esther did the commandment of
Mordecai like as when she was brought up with him.
in those days while Mordecai sat in the king s gate two of
the king s chamberlains Bigthan and Teresh of those which
kept the door were wroth and sought to lay hands on the king
Ahasuerus.
and the thing was known to Mordecai who told it unto Esther
the queen and Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai s
name.
and when inquisition was made of the matter it was found out
therefore they were both hanged on a tree and it was written
in the book of the chronicles before the king.
after these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of
Hammedatha the Agagite and advanced him and set his seat
above all the princes that were with him.
and all the king s servants that were in the king s gate
bowed and reverenced Haman for the king had so commanded
concerning him. but Mordecai bowed not nor did him reverence.
then the king s servants which were in the king s gate said
unto Mordecai why transgressest thou the king s commandment?
now it came to pass when they spake daily unto him and he
hearkened not unto them that they told Haman to see whether
Mordecai s matters would stand for he had told them that he
was a Jew.
and when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not nor did him
reverence then was Haman full of wrath.
and he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone for they
had shewed him the people of Mordecai wherefore Haman sought
to destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom
of Ahasuerus even the people of Mordecai.
in the first month that is the month Nisan in the twelfth
year of king Ahasuerus they cast Pur that is the Lot
before Haman from day to day and from month to month to the
twelfth month that is the month Adar.
and Haman said unto king Ahasuerus there is a certain people
scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the
provinces of thy kingdom and their laws are diverse from all
people Neither keep they the king s laws therefore it is not
for the king s profit to suffer them.
if it please the king let it be written that they may be
destroyed and I will pay Ten thousand talents of Silver to
the hands of those that have the charge of the business to
bring it into the king s treasuries.
and the king took his ring from his hand and gave it unto
Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite the Jews enemy.
and the king said unto Haman the Silver is given to thee the
people also to do with them as it seemeth good to thee.
then were the king s scribes called on the thirteenth day of
the first month and there was written according to all that
Haman had commanded unto the king s lieutenants and to the
governors that were over every province and to the rulers of
every people of every province according to the writing
thereof and to every people after their language in the name
of king Ahasuerus was it written and sealed with the king s
ring.
and the letters were sent by posts into all the king s
provinces to destroy to kill and to cause to perish all
Jews both young and old little children and women in one
day even upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month which
is the month Adar and to take the spoil of them for a prey.
the copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every
province was published unto all people that they should be
ready against that day.
the posts went out being hastened by the king s commandment
and the decree was given in Shushan the palace. and the king
and Haman sat down to drink but the city Shushan was
perplexed.
when Mordecai perceived all that was done Mordecai rent his
clothes and put on sackcloth with ashes and went out into
the midst of the city and cried with a loud and a bitter cry
and came even before the king s gate for none might enter
into the king s gate clothed with sackcloth.
and in every province whithersoever the king s commandment
and his decree came there was great mourning among the Jews
and fasting and weeping and wailing and many lay in
sackcloth and ashes.
so Esther s maids and her chamberlains came and told it her.
then was the queen exceedingly grieved and she sent raiment
to clothe Mordecai and to take away his sackcloth from him
but he received it not.
then called Esther for Hatach one of the king s chamberlains
whom he had appointed to attend upon her and gave him a
commandment to Mordecai to know what it was and why it was.
so Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the street of the city
which was before the king s gate.
and Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto him and
of the sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the
king s treasuries for the Jews to destroy them.
also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that
was given at Shushan to destroy them to shew it unto Esther
and to declare it unto her and to charge her that she should
go in unto the king to make supplication unto him and to
make request before him for her people.
and Hatach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai.
again Esther spake unto Hatach and gave him commandment unto
Mordecai
all the king s servants and the people of the king s
provinces do know that whosoever whether man or women
shall come unto the king into the inner court who is not
called there is one law of his to put him to death except
such to whom the king shall hold out the golden sceptre that
he may live but I have not been called to come in unto the
king these thirty days.
and they told to Mordecai Esther s words.
then Mordecai commanded to answer Esther think not with
thyself that thou shalt escape in the king s house more than
all the Jews.
for if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time then
shall there enlargement and deliverance Arise to the Jews from
another place but thou and thy father s house shall be
destroyed and who knoweth whether thou art come to the
kingdom for such a time as this?
then Esther bade them return Mordecai this answer
go gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan
and fast ye for me and Neither eat nor drink three days
night or day I also and my maidens will fast likewise and so
will I go in unto the king which is not according to the law
and if I perish I perish.
so Mordecai went his way and did according to all that Esther
had commanded him.
now it came to pass on the third day that Esther put on her
royal apparel and stood in the inner court of the king s
house over against the king s house and the king sat upon
his royal throne in the royal house over against the gate of
the house.
and it was so when the king saw Esther the queen standing in
the court that she obtained favour in his sight and the king
held out to Esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand. so
Esther drew near and touched the top of the sceptre.
then said the king unto her what wilt thou queen Esther? and
what is thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half
of the kingdom.
and Esther answered if it seem good unto the king let the
king and Haman come this day unto the banquet that I have
prepared for him.
then the king said cause Haman to make haste that he may do
as Esther hath said. so the king and Haman came to the banquet
that Esther had prepared.
and the king said unto Esther at the banquet of wine what is
thy petition? and it shall be granted thee and what is thy
request? even to the half of the kingdom it shall be
performed.
then answered Esther and said my petition and my request is
if I have found favour in the sight of the king and if it
please the king to grant my petition and to perform my
request let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I
shall prepare for them and I will do to morrow as the king
hath said.
then went Haman forth that day joyful and with a glad heart
but when Haman saw Mordecai in the king s gate that he stood
not up nor moved for him he was full of indignation against
Mordecai.
nevertheless Haman refrained himself and when he came home
he sent and called for his friends and Zeresh his wife.
and Haman told them of the glory of his Riches and the
multitude of his children and all the things wherein the king
had promoted him and how he had advanced him above the
princes and servants of the king.
Haman said moreover yea Esther the queen did let no man come
in with the king unto the banquet that she had prepared but
myself and to morrow Am I invited unto her also with the
king.
yet all this availeth me nothing so long as I see Mordecai
the Jew sitting at the king s gate.
then said Zeresh his wife and all his friends unto him let a
gallows be made of fifty cubits high and to morrow speak thou
unto the king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon then go
thou in merrily with the king unto the banquet. and the thing
pleased Haman and he caused the gallows to be made.
on that night could not the king sleep and he commanded to
bring the book of records of the chronicles and they were
read before the king.
and it was found written that Mordecai had told of Bigthana
and Teresh two of the king s chamberlains the keepers of the
door who sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus.
and the king said what honour and dignity hath been done to
Mordecai for this? then said the king s servants that
ministered unto him there is nothing done for him.
and the king said who is in the court? now Haman was come
into the outward court of the king s house to speak unto the
king to hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for
him.
and the king s servants said unto him behold Haman standeth
in the court. and the king said let him come in.
so Haman came in. and the king said unto him what shall be
done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour? now
Haman thought in his heart to whom would the king delight to
do honour more than to myself?
and Haman answered the king for the man whom the king
delighteth to honour
let the royal apparel be brought which the king useth to wear
and the horse that the king rideth upon and the crown royal
which is set upon his head
and let this apparel and horse be delivered to the hand of one
of the king s most noble princes that they may array the man
withal whom the king delighteth to honour and bring him on
horseback through the street of the city and proclaim before
him thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delighteth
to honour.
then the king said to Haman make haste and take the apparel
and the horse as thou hast said and do even so to Mordecai
the Jew that sitteth at the king s gate let nothing fail of
all that thou hast spoken.
then took Haman the apparel and the horse and arrayed
Mordecai and brought him on horseback through the street of
the city and proclaimed before him thus shall it be done
unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour.
and Mordecai came again to the king s gate. but Haman hasted
to his house mourning and having his head covered.
and Haman told Zeresh his wife and all his friends every thing
that had befallen him. then said his wise men and Zeresh his
wife unto him if Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews before
whom thou hast begun to fall thou shalt not prevail against
him but shalt surely fall before him.
and while they were yet talking with him came the king s
chamberlains and hasted to bring Haman unto the banquet that
Esther had prepared.
so the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen.
and the king said again unto Esther on the second day at the
banquet of wine what is thy petition queen Esther? and it
shall be granted thee and what is thy request? and it shall
be performed even to the half of the kingdom.
then Esther the queen answered and said if I have found
favour in thy sight O king and if it please the king let my
life be given me at my petition and my people at my request
for we are sold I and my people to be destroyed to be
slain and to perish. but if we had been sold for bondmen and
bondwomen I had held my tongue although the enemy could not
countervail the king s damage.
then the king Ahasuerus answered and said unto Esther the
queen who is he and where is he that durst presume in his
heart to do so?
and Esther said the adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman.
then Haman was afraid before the king and the queen.
and the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath
went into the palace garden and Haman stood up to make
request for his life to Esther the queen for he saw that
there was evil determined against him by the king.
then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place
of the banquet of wine and Haman was fallen upon the bed
whereon Esther was. then said the king will he force the
queen also before me in the house? as the word went out of
king s mouth they covered Haman s face.
and Harbonah one of the chamberlains said before the king
behold also the gallows fifty cubits high which Haman had
made for Mordecai who spoken good for the king standeth in
the house of Haman. then the king said hang him thereon.
so they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for
Mordecai. then was the king s wrath pacified.
on that day did the king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman the
Jews enemy unto Esther the queen. and Mordecai came before
the king for Esther had told what he was unto her.
and the king took off his ring which he had taken from Haman
and gave it unto Mordecai. and Esther set Mordecai over the
house of Haman.
and Esther spake yet again before the king and fell down at
his feet and besought him with tears to put away the mischief
of Haman the Agagite and his device that he had devised
against the Jews.
then the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther. so
Esther arose and stood before the king
and said if it please the king and if I have favour in his
sight and the thing seem right before the king and I be
pleasing in his eyes let it be written to reverse the letters
devised by Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite which he
wrote to destroy the Jews which are in all the king s
provinces
for how can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto my
people? or how can I endure to see the destruction of my
kindred?
then the king Ahasuerus said unto Esther the queen and to
Mordecai the Jew behold I have given Esther the house of
Haman and him they have hanged upon the gallows because he
laid his hand upon the Jews.
write ye also for the Jews as it liketh you in the king s
name and seal it with the king s ring for the writing which
is written in the king s name and sealed with the king s
ring may no man reverse.
then were the king s scribes called at that time in the third
month that is the month Sivan on the three and twentieth
day thereof and it was written according to all that Mordecai
commanded unto the Jews and to the lieutenants and the
deputies and rulers of the provinces which are from India unto
Ethiopia an hundred twenty and seven provinces unto every
province according to the writing thereof and unto every
people after their language and to the Jews according to
their writing and according to their language.
and he wrote in the king Ahasuerus name and sealed it with
the king s ring and sent letters by posts on horseback and
riders on mules camels and young dromedaries
wherein the king granted the Jews which were in every city to
gather themselves together and to stand for their life to
destroy to slay and to cause to perish all the power of the
people and province that would assault them both little ones
and women and to take the spoil of them for a prey
upon one day in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus namely
upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month which is the
month Adar.
the copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every
province was published unto all people and that the Jews
should be ready against that day to avenge themselves on their
enemies.
so the posts that rode upon mules and camels went out being
hastened and pressed on by the king s commandment. and the
decree was given at Shushan the palace.
and Mordecai went out from the presence of the king in royal
apparel of blue and white and with a great crown of gold and
with a garment of fine linen and purple and the city of
Shushan rejoiced and was glad.
the Jews had light and gladness and joy and honour.
and in every province and in every city whithersoever the
king s commandment and his decree came the Jews had joy and
gladness a feast and a good day. and many of the people of
the land became Jews for the fear of the Jews fell upon them.
now in the twelfth month that is the month Adar on the
thirteenth day of the same when the king s commandment and
his decree drew near to be put in execution in the day that
the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them though
it was turned to the contrary that the Jews had rule over
them that hated them
the Jews gathered themselves together in their cities
throughout all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus to lay
hand on such as sought their hurt and no man could withstand
them for the fear of them fell upon all people.
and all the rulers of the provinces and the lieutenants and
the deputies and officers of the king helped the Jews
because the fear of Mordecai fell upon them.
for Mordecai was great in the king s house and his fame went
out throughout all the provinces for this man Mordecai waxed
greater and greater.
thus the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the
sword and slaughter and destruction and did what they would
unto those that hated them.
and in Shushan the palace the Jews slew and destroyed five
hundred men.
and Parshandatha and Dalphon and Aspatha
and Poratha and Adalia and Aridatha
and Parmashta and Arisai and Aridai and Vajezatha
the Ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha the enemy of the
Jews slew they but on the spoil laid they not their hand.
on that day the number of those that were slain in Shushan the
palace was brought before the king.
and the king said unto Esther the queen the Jews have slain
and destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace and the
Ten sons of Haman what have they done in the rest of the
king s provinces? now what is thy petition? and it shall be
granted thee or what is thy request further? and it shall be
done.
then said Esther if it please the king let it be granted to
the Jews which are in Shushan to do to morrow also according
unto this day s decree and let Haman s Ten sons be hanged
upon the gallows.
and the king commanded it so to be done and the decree was
given at Shushan and they hanged Haman s Ten sons.
for the Jews that were in Shushan gathered themselves together
on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar and slew three
hundred men at Shushan but on the prey they laid not their
hand.
but the other Jews that were in the king s provinces gathered
themselves together and stood for their lives and had rest
from their enemies and slew of their foes seventy and five
thousand but they laid not their hands on the prey
on the thirteenth day of the month Adar and on the fourteenth
day of the same rested they and made it a day of feasting and
gladness.
but the Jews that were at Shushan assembled together on the
thirteenth day thereof and on the fourteenth thereof and on
the fifteenth day of the same they rested and made it a day
of feasting and gladness.
therefore the Jews of the villages that dwelt in the unwalled
towns made the fourteenth day of the month Adar a day of
gladness and feasting and a good day and of sending portions
one to another.
and Mordecai wrote these things and sent letters unto all the
Jews that were in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus
both nigh and far
to stablish this among them that they should keep the
fourteenth day of the month Adar and the fifteenth day of the
same yearly
as the days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies and
the month which was turned unto them from sorrow to joy and
from mourning into a good day that they should make them days
of feasting and joy and of sending portions one to another
and gifts to the poor.
and the Jews undertook to do as they had begun and as
Mordecai had written unto them
because Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite the enemy of
all the Jews had devised against the Jews to destroy them
and had cast Pur that is the Lot to consume them and to
destroy them
but when Esther came before the king he commanded by letters
that his wicked device which he devised against the Jews
should return upon his own head and that he and his sons
should be hanged on the gallows.
wherefore they called these days Purim after the name of Pur.
therefore for all the words of this letter and of that which
they had seen concerning this matter and which had come unto
them
the Jews ordained and took upon them and upon their seed
and upon all such as joined themselves unto them so as it
should not fail that they would keep these two days according
to their writing and according to their appointed time every
year
and that these days should be remembered and kept throughout
every generation every family every province and every
city and that these days of Purim should not fail from among
the Jews nor the memorial of them perish from their seed.
then Esther the queen the daughter of Abihail and Mordecai
the Jew wrote with all authority to confirm this second
letter of Purim.
and he sent the letters unto all the Jews to the hundred
twenty and seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus with
words of peace and truth
to confirm these days of Purim in their times appointed
according as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had
enjoined them and as they had decreed for themselves and for
their seed the matters of the fastings and their cry.
and the decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim and
it was written in the book.
and the king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land and upon
the isles of the sea.
and all the acts of his power and of his might and the
declaration of the greatness of Mordecai whereunto the king
advanced him are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia?
for Mordecai the Jew was next unto king Ahasuerus and great
among the Jews and accepted of the multitude of his brethren
seeking the wealth of his people and speaking peace to all
his seed.
there was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job and
that man was perfect and upright and one that feared God and
eschewed evil.
and there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters.
his substance also was seven thousand sheep and three
thousand camels and five hundred yoke of oxen and five
hundred she asses and a very great household so that this
man was the greatest of all the men of the east.
and his sons went and feasted in their houses every one his
day and sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to
drink with them.
and it was so when the days of their feasting were gone
about that Job sent and sanctified them and rose up early in
the morning and offered burnt offerings according to the
number of them all for Job said it may be that my sons have
sinned and cursed God in their hearts. thus did Job
continually.
now there was a day when the sons of God came to present
themselves before the lord and Satan came also among them.
and the lord said unto Satan whence comest thou? then Satan
answered the lord and said from going to and fro in the
earth and from walking up and down in it.
and the lord said unto Satan hast thou considered my servant
Job that there is none like him in the earth a perfect and
an upright man one that feareth God and escheweth evil?
then Satan answered the lord and said doth Job fear God for
nought?
hast not thou made an hedge about him and about his house
and about all that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed
the work of his hands and his substance is increased in the
land.
but put forth thine hand now and touch all that he hath and
he will curse thee to thy face.
and the lord said unto Satan behold all that he hath is in
thy power only upon himself put not forth thine hand. so
Satan went forth from the presence of the lord.
and there was a day when his sons and his daughters were
eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother s house
and there came a messenger unto Job and said the oxen were
plowing and the asses feeding beside them
and the Sabeans fell upon them and took them away yea they
have slain the servants with the edge of the sword and I only
Am escaped alone to tell thee.
while he was yet speaking there came also another and said
the fire of God is fallen from heaven and hath burned up the
sheep and the servants and consumed them and I only Am
escaped alone to tell thee.
while he was yet speaking there came also another and said
the Chaldeans made out three Bands and fell upon the camels
and have carried them away yea and slain the servants with
the edge of the sword and I only Am escaped alone to tell
thee.
while he was yet speaking there came also another and said
thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in
their eldest brother s house
and behold there came a great wind from the wilderness and
smote the four corners of the house and it fell upon the
young men and they are dead and I only Am escaped alone to
tell thee.
then Job arose and rent his mantle and shaved his head and
fell down upon the ground and worshipped
and said naked came I out of my mother s womb and naked
shall I return thither the lord gave and the lord hath taken
away blessed be the name of the lord.
in all this Job sinned not nor charged God foolishly.
again there was a day when the sons of God came to present
themselves before the lord and Satan came also among them to
present himself before the lord.
and the lord said unto Satan from whence comest thou? and
Satan answered the lord and said from going to and fro in
the earth and from walking up and down in it.
and the lord said unto Satan hast thou considered my servant
Job that there is none like him in the earth a perfect and
an upright man one that feareth God and escheweth evil? and
still he holdeth fast his integrity although thou movedst me
against him to destroy him without cause.
and Satan answered the lord and said skin for skin yea all
that a man hath will he give for his life.
but put forth thine hand now and touch his bone and his
flesh and he will curse thee to thy face.
and the lord said unto Satan behold he is in thine hand but
save his life.
so went Satan forth from the presence of the lord and smote
Job with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown.
and he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal and he
sat down among the ashes.
then said his wife unto him dost thou still retain thine
integrity? curse God and die.
but he said unto her thou speakest as one of the foolish
women speaketh. what? shall we receive good at the hand of
God and shall we not receive evil? in all this did not Job
Sin with his lips.
now when Job s three friends heard of all this evil that was
come upon him they came every one from his own place Eliphaz
the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the
Naamathite for they had made an appointment together to come
to mourn with him and to comfort him.
and when they lifted up their eyes afar off and knew him not
they lifted up their voice and wept and they rent every one
his mantle and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.
so they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven
nights and none spake a word unto him for they saw that his
grief was very great.
after this opened Job his mouth and cursed his day.
and Job spake and said
let the day perish wherein I was born and the night in which
it was said there is a man child conceived.
let that day be darkness let not God regard it from above
Neither let the light shine upon it.
let darkness and the shadow of death stain it let a cloud
dwell upon it let the blackness of the day terrify it.
as for that night let darkness seize upon it let it not be
joined unto the days of the year let it not come into the
number of the months.
lo let that night be solitary let no joyful voice come
therein.
let them curse it that curse the day who are ready to raise
up their mourning.
let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark let it look for
light but have none Neither let it see the dawning of the
day
because it shut not up the doors of my mother s womb nor hid
sorrow from mine eyes.
why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost
when I came out of the belly?
why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should
suck?
for now should I have lain still and been quiet I should have
slept then had I been at rest
with kings and counsellors of the earth which build desolate
places for themselves
or with princes that had gold who filled their houses with
Silver
or as an hidden untimely birth I had not been as infants
which never saw light.
there the wicked cease from troubling and there the weary be
at rest.
there the prisoners rest together they hear not the voice of
the oppressor.
the small and great are there and the servant is free from
his Master.
wherefore is light given to him that is in misery and life
unto the bitter in soul
which long for death but it cometh not and dig for it more
than for hid treasures
which rejoice exceedingly and are glad when they can find
the grave?
why is light given to a man whose way is hid and whom God
hath hedged in?
for my sighing cometh before I eat and my roarings are poured
out like the waters.
for the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me and that
which I was afraid of is come unto me.
I was not in safety Neither had I rest Neither was I quiet
yet trouble came.
then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said
if we assay to commune with thee wilt thou be grieved? but
who can withhold himself from speaking?
behold thou hast instructed many and thou hast strengthened
the weak hands.
thy words have upholden him that was falling and thou hast
strengthened the feeble knees.
but now it is come upon thee and thou faintest it toucheth
thee and thou art troubled.
is not this thy fear thy confidence thy hope and the
uprightness of thy ways?
remember I pray thee who ever perished being innocent? or
where were the righteous cut off?
even as I have seen they that plow iniquity and sow
wickedness reap the same.
by the blast of God they perish and by the breath of his
nostrils are they consumed.
the roaring of the lion and the voice of the fierce lion and
the teeth of the young lions are broken.
the old lion perisheth for lack of prey and the stout lion s
whelps are scattered abroad.
now a thing was secretly brought to me and mine ear received
a little thereof.
in thoughts from the visions of the night when deep sleep
falleth on men
fear came upon me and trembling which made all my bones to
shake.
then a spirit passed before my face the hair of my flesh
stood up
it stood still but I could not discern the form thereof an
image was before mine eyes there was silence and I heard a
voice saying
shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be more
pure than his maker?
behold he put no trust in his servants and his angels he
charged with folly
how Much less in them that dwell in houses of clay whose
foundation is in the dust which are crushed before the moth?
they are destroyed from morning to evening they perish for
ever without any regarding it.
doth not their excellency which is in them go away? they die
even without wisdom.
call now if there be any that will answer thee and to which
of the saints wilt thou turn?
for wrath killeth the foolish man and envy slayeth the silly
one.
I have seen the foolish taking root but suddenly I cursed his
habitation.
his children are far from safety and they are crushed in the
gate Neither is there any to deliver them.
whose harvest the hungry eateth up and taketh it even out of
the thorns and the robber swalloweth up their substance.
although affliction cometh not forth of the dust Neither doth
trouble spring out of the ground
yet man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward.
I would seek unto God and unto God would I commit my cause
which doeth great things and unsearchable marvellous things
without number
who giveth rain upon the earth and sendeth waters upon the
fields
to set up on high those that be low that those which mourn
may be exalted to safety.
he disappointeth the devices of the crafty so that their
hands cannot perform their enterprise.
he taketh the wise in their own craftiness and the counsel of
the froward is carried headlong.
they meet with darkness in the day time and grope in the
noonday as in the night.
but he saveth the poor from the sword from their mouth and
from the hand of the Mighty.
so the poor hath hope and iniquity stoppeth her mouth.
behold happy is the man whom God correcteth therefore
despise not thou the chastening of the almighty
for he maketh sore and bindeth up he woundeth and his hands
make whole.
he shall deliver thee in six troubles yea in seven there
shall no evil touch thee.
in famine he shall redeem thee from death and in war from the
power of the sword.
thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue Neither
shalt thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh.
at destruction and famine thou shalt laugh Neither shalt thou
be afraid of the beasts of the earth.
for thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field and
the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.
and thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace and
thou shalt visit thy habitation and shalt not Sin.
thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great and thine
offspring as the grass of the earth.
thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age like as a shock of
corn cometh in in his season.
lo this we have searched it so it is hear it and know thou
it for thy good.
but Job answered and said
oh that my grief were throughly weighed and my calamity laid
in the balances together
for now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea
therefore my words are swallowed up.
for the arrows of the almighty are within me the poison
whereof drinketh up my spirit the terrors of God do set
themselves in array against me.
doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox
over his fodder?
can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? or is there
any taste in the white of an egg?
the things that my soul refused to touch are as my sorrowful
meat.
oh that I might have my request and that God would grant me
the thing that I long for
even that it would please God to destroy me that he would let
loose his hand and cut me off
then should I yet have comfort yea I would harden myself in
sorrow let him not spare for I have not concealed the words
of the holy one.
what is my strength that I should hope? and what is mine end
that I should prolong my life?
is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of
brass?
is not my help in me? and is wisdom driven quite from me?
to him that is afflicted pity should be shewed from his
friend but he forsaketh the fear of the almighty.
my brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook and as the
stream of brooks they pass away
which are blackish by reason of the ice and wherein the snow
is hid
what time they wax warm they vanish when it is hot they are
consumed out of their place.
the paths of their way are turned aside they go to nothing
and perish.
the troops of Tema looked the companies of Sheba waited for
them.
they were confounded because they had hoped they came
thither and were ashamed.
for now ye are nothing ye see my casting down and are
afraid.
did I say bring unto me? or give a reward for me of your
substance?
or deliver me from the enemy s hand? or redeem me from the
hand of the Mighty?
teach me and I will hold my tongue and cause me to
understand wherein I have erred.
how forcible are right words but what doth your arguing
reprove?
do ye imagine to reprove words and the speeches of one that
is desperate which are as wind?
yea ye overwhelm the fatherless and ye dig a pit for your
friend.
now therefore be content look upon me for it is evident unto
you if I lie.
return I pray you let it not be iniquity yea return again
my righteousness is in it.
is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern
perverse things?
is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not his
days also like the days of an hireling?
as a servant earnestly desireth the shadow and as an hireling
looketh for the reward of his work
so Am I made to possess months of vanity and wearisome nights
are appointed to me.
when I lie down I say when shall I Arise and the night be
gone? and I Am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of
the day.
my flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust my skin is
broken and become loathsome.
my days are swifter than a weaver s shuttle and are spent
without hope.
O remember that my life is wind mine eye shall no more see
good.
the eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more thine
eyes are upon me and I Am not.
as the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away so he that goeth
down to the grave shall come up no more.
he shall return no more to his house Neither shall his place
know him any more.
therefore I will not refrain my mouth I will speak in the
anguish of my spirit I will complain in the bitterness of my
soul.
Am I a sea or a whale that thou settest a watch over me?
when I say my bed shall comfort me my couch shall ease my
complaints
then thou scarest me with dreams and terrifiest me through
visions
so that my soul chooseth strangling and death rather than my
life.
I loathe it I would not live alway let me alone for my days
are vanity.
what is man that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou
shouldest set thine heart upon him?
and that thou shouldest visit him every morning and try him
every moment?
how long wilt thou not depart from me nor let me alone till I
swallow down my spittle?
I have sinned what shall I do unto thee O thou preserver of
men? why hast thou set me as a Mark against thee so that I Am
a burden to myself?
and why dost thou not pardon my transgression and take away
my iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust and thou shalt
seek me in the morning but I shall not be.
then answered Bildad the Shuhite and said
how long wilt thou speak these things? and how long shall the
words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?
doth God pervert judgment? or doth the almighty pervert
justice?
if thy children have sinned against him and he have cast them
away for their transgression
if thou wouldest seek unto God betimes and make thy
supplication to the almighty
if thou wert pure and upright surely now he would awake for
thee and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.
though thy beginning was small yet thy latter end should
greatly increase.
for enquire I pray thee of the former age and prepare
thyself to the search of their fathers
 for we are but of yesterday and know nothing because our
days upon earth are a shadow
shall not they teach thee and tell thee and utter words out
of their heart?
can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow without
water?
whilst it is yet in his greenness and not cut down it
withereth before any other herb.
so are the paths of all that forget God and the hypocrite s
hope shall perish
whose hope shall be cut off and whose trust shall be a
spider s web.
he shall lean upon his house but it shall not stand he shall
hold it fast but it shall not endure.
he is green before the sun and his branch shooteth forth in
his garden.
his roots are wrapped about the heap and seeth the place of
stones.
if he destroy him from his place then it shall deny him
saying I have not seen thee.
behold this is the joy of his way and out of the earth shall
others grow.
behold God will not cast away a perfect man Neither will he
help the evil doers
till he fill thy mouth with laughing and thy lips with
rejoicing.
they that hate thee shall be clothed with shame and the
dwelling place of the wicked shall come to nought.
then Job answered and said
I know it is so of a truth but how should man be just with
God?
if he will contend with him he cannot answer him one of a
thousand.
he is wise in heart and Mighty in strength who hath hardened
himself against him and hath prospered?
which removeth the mountains and they know not which
overturneth them in his anger.
which shaketh the earth out of her place and the pillars
thereof tremble.
which commandeth the sun and it riseth not and sealeth up
the stars.
which alone spreadeth out the heavens and treadeth upon the
waves of the sea.
which maketh Arcturus Orion and Pleiades and the chambers
of the south.
which doeth great things past finding out yea and wonders
without number.
lo he goeth by me and I see him not he passeth on also but
I perceive him not.
behold he taketh away who can hinder him? who will say unto
him what doest thou?
if God will not withdraw his anger the proud helpers do stoop
under him.
how Much less shall I answer him and choose out my words to
reason with him?
whom though I were righteous yet would I not answer but I
would make supplication to my judge.
if I had called and he had answered me yet would I not
believe that he had hearkened unto my voice.
for he breaketh me with a tempest and multiplieth my wounds
without cause.
he will not suffer me to take my breath but filleth me with
bitterness.
if I speak of strength lo he is strong and if of judgment
who shall set me a time to plead?
if I justify myself mine own mouth shall condemn me if I
say I Am perfect it shall also prove me perverse.
though I were perfect yet would I not know my soul I would
despise my life.
this is one thing therefore I said it he destroyeth the
perfect and the wicked.
if the scourge slay suddenly he will laugh at the trial of
the innocent.
the earth is given into the hand of the wicked he covereth
the faces of the judges thereof if not where and who is he?
now my days are swifter than a post they flee away they see
no good.
they are passed away as the swift ships as the eagle that
hasteth to the prey.
if I say I will forget my complaint I will leave off my
heaviness and comfort myself
I Am afraid of all my sorrows I know that thou wilt not hold
me innocent.
if I be wicked why then labour I in vain?
if I wash myself with snow water and make my hands never so
clean
yet shalt thou plunge me in the ditch and mine own clothes
shall abhor me.
for he is not a man as I Am that I should answer him and we
should come together in judgment.
Neither is there any daysman betwixt us that might lay his
hand upon us both.
let him take his rod away from me and let not his fear
terrify me
then would I speak and not fear him but it is not so with
me.
my soul is weary of my life I will leave my complaint upon
myself I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
I will say unto God do not condemn me shew me wherefore thou
contendest with me.
is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress that thou
shouldest despise the work of thine hands and shine upon the
counsel of the wicked?
hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as man seeth?
are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man s days
that thou enquirest after mine iniquity and searchest after
my Sin?
thou knowest that I Am not wicked and there is none that can
deliver out of thine hand.
thine hands have made me and fashioned me together round
about yet thou dost destroy me.
remember I beseech thee that thou hast made me as the clay
and wilt thou bring me into dust again?
hast thou not poured me out as milk and curdled me like
cheese?
thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh and hast fenced me
with bones and sinews.
thou hast granted me life and favour and thy visitation hath
preserved my spirit.
and these things hast thou hid in thine heart I know that
this is with thee.
if I Sin then thou markest me and thou wilt not acquit me
from mine iniquity.
if I be wicked woe unto me and if I be righteous yet will I
not lift up my head. I Am full of confusion therefore see
thou mine affliction
for it increaseth. thou huntest me as a fierce lion and again
thou shewest thyself marvellous upon me.
thou renewest thy witnesses against me and increasest thine
indignation upon me changes and war are against me.
wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb? oh
that I had given up the ghost and no eye had seen me
I should have been as though I had not been I should have
been carried from the womb to the grave.
are not my days few? cease then and let me alone that I may
take comfort a little
before I go whence I shall not return even to the land of
darkness and the shadow of death
a land of darkness as darkness itself and of the shadow of
death without any order and where the light is as darkness.
then answered Zophar the Naamathite and said
should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a
man full of talk be justified?
should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou
mockest shall no man make thee ashamed?
for thou hast said my doctrine is pure and I Am clean in
thine eyes.
but oh that God would speak and open his lips against thee
and that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom that they
are double to that which is know therefore that God exacteth
of thee less than thine iniquity deserveth.
canst thou by searching find out God? canst thou find out the
almighty unto perfection?
it is as high as heaven what canst thou do? deeper than hell
what canst thou know?
the measure thereof is longer than the earth and broader than
the sea.
if he cut off and shut up or gather together then who can
hinder him?
for he knoweth vain men he seeth wickedness also will he not
then consider it?
for vain men would be wise though man be born like a wild
ass s colt.
if thou prepare thine heart and stretch out thine hands
toward him
if iniquity be in thine hand put it far away and let not
wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles.
for then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot yea thou
shalt be stedfast and shalt not fear
because thou shalt forget thy misery and remember it as
waters that pass away
and thine age shall be clearer than the noonday thou shalt
shine forth thou shalt be as the morning.
and thou shalt be secure because there is hope yea thou
shalt dig about thee and thou shalt take thy rest in safety.
also thou shalt lie down and none shall make thee afraid
yea many shall make suit unto thee.
but the eyes of the wicked shall fail and they shall not
escape and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.
and Job answered and said
no doubt but ye are the people and wisdom shall die with you.
but I have understanding as well as you I Am not inferior to
you yea who knoweth not such things as these?
I Am as one mocked of his neighbour who calleth upon God and
he answereth him the just upright man is laughed to scorn.
he that is ready to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised
in the thought of him that is at ease.
the tabernacles of robbers prosper and they that provoke God
are secure into whose hand God bringeth abundantly.
but ask now the beasts and they shall teach thee and the
fowls of the air and they shall tell thee
or speak to the earth and it shall teach thee and the fishes
of the sea shall declare unto thee.
who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the lord hath
wrought this?
in whose hand is the soul of every living thing and the
breath of all mankind.
doth not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat?
with the ancient is wisdom and in length of days
understanding.
with him is wisdom and strength he hath counsel and
understanding.
behold he breaketh down and it cannot be built again he
shutteth up a man and there can be no opening.
behold he withholdeth the waters and they dry up also he
sendeth them out and they overturn the earth.
with him is strength and wisdom the deceived and the deceiver
are his.
he leadeth counsellors away spoiled and maketh the judges
fools.
he looseth the bond of kings and girdeth their loins with a
girdle.
he leadeth princes away spoiled and overthroweth the Mighty.
he removeth away the speech of the trusty and taketh away the
understanding of the aged.
he poureth contempt upon princes and weakeneth the strength
of the Mighty.
he discovereth deep things out of darkness and bringeth out
to light the shadow of death.
he increaseth the nations and destroyeth them he enlargeth
the nations and straiteneth them again.
he taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the
earth and causeth them to wander in a wilderness where there
is no way.
they grope in the dark without light and he maketh them to
stagger like a drunken man.
lo mine eye hath seen all this mine ear hath heard and
understood it.
what ye know the same do I know also I Am not inferior unto
you.
surely I would speak to the almighty and I desire to reason
with God.
but ye are forgers of lies ye are all physicians of no value.
O that ye would altogether hold your peace and it should be
your wisdom.
hear now my reasoning and hearken to the pleadings of my
lips.
will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him?
will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God?
is it good that he should search you out? or as one man
mocketh another do ye so mock him?
he will surely reprove you if ye do secretly accept persons.
shall not his excellency make you afraid? and his dread fall
upon you?
your remembrances are like unto ashes your bodies to bodies
of clay.
hold your peace let me alone that I may speak and let come
on me what will.
wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth and put my life in
mine hand?
though he slay me yet will I trust in him but I will
maintain mine own ways before him.
he also shall be my salvation for an hypocrite shall not come
before him.
hear diligently my speech and my declaration with your ears.
behold now I have ordered my cause I know that I shall be
justified.
who is he that will plead with me? for now if I hold my
tongue I shall give up the ghost.
only do not two things unto me then will I not hide myself
from thee.
withdraw thine hand far from me and let not thy dread make me
afraid.
then call thou and I will answer or let me speak and answer
thou me.
how many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my
transgression and my Sin.
wherefore hidest thou thy face and holdest me for thine
enemy?
wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and wilt thou pursue
the dry stubble?
for thou writest bitter things against me and makest me to
possess the iniquities of my youth.
thou puttest my feet also in the stocks and lookest narrowly
unto all my paths thou settest a print upon the heels of my
feet.
and he as a rotten thing consumeth as a garment that is
moth eaten.
man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of
trouble.
he cometh forth like a flower and is cut down he fleeth also
as a shadow and continueth not.
and doth thou open thine eyes upon such an one and bringest
me into judgment with thee?
who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.
seeing his days are determined the number of his months are
with thee thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass
turn from him that he may rest till he shall accomplish as
an hireling his day.
for there is hope of a tree if it be cut down that it will
sprout again and that the tender branch thereof will not
cease.
though the root thereof wax old in the earth and the stock
thereof die in the ground
yet through the scent of water it will bud and bring forth
boughs like a plant.
but man dieth and wasteth away yea man giveth up the ghost
and where is he?
as the waters fail from the sea and the flood decayeth and
drieth up
so man lieth down and riseth not till the heavens be no
more they shall not awake nor be raised out of their sleep.
O that thou wouldest hide me in the grave that thou wouldest
keep me secret until thy wrath be past that thou wouldest
appoint me a set time and remember me
if a man die shall he live again? all the days of my
appointed time will I wait till my change come.
thou shalt call and I will answer thee thou wilt have a
desire to the work of thine hands.
for now thou numberest my steps dost thou not watch over my
Sin?
my transgression is sealed up in a bag and thou sewest up
mine iniquity.
and surely the mountains falling cometh to nought and the
rock is removed out of his place.
the waters wear the stones thou washest away the things which
grow out of the dust of the earth and thou destroyest the
hope of man.
thou prevailest for ever against him and he passeth thou
changest his countenance and sendest him away.
his sons come to honour and he knoweth it not and they are
brought low but he perceiveth it not of them.
but his flesh upon him shall have pain and his soul within
him shall mourn.
then answered Eliphaz the Temanite and said
should a wise man utter vain knowledge and fill his belly
with the east wind?
should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches
wherewith he can do no good?
yea thou castest off fear and restrainest prayer before God.
for thy mouth uttereth thine iniquity and thou choosest the
tongue of the crafty.
thine own mouth condemneth thee and not I yea thine own
lips testify against thee.
art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before
the hills?
hast thou heard the secret of God? and dost thou restrain
wisdom to thyself?
what knowest thou that we know not? what understandest thou
which is not in us?
with us are both the grayheaded and very aged men Much elder
than thy father.
are the consolations of God small with thee? is there any
secret thing with thee?
why doth thine heart carry thee away? and what do thy eyes
wink at
that thou turnest thy spirit against God and lettest such
words go out of thy mouth?
what is man that he should be clean? and he which is born of
a woman that he should be righteous?
behold he putteth no trust in his saints yea the heavens
are not clean in his sight.
how Much more abominable and filthy is man which drinketh
iniquity like water?
I will shew thee hear me and that which I have seen I will
declare
which wise men have told from their fathers and have not hid
it
unto whom alone the earth was given and no stranger passed
among them.
the wicked man travaileth with pain all his days and the
number of years is hidden to the oppressor.
a dreadful sound is in his ears in prosperity the destroyer
shall come upon him.
he believeth not that he shall return out of darkness and he
is waited for of the sword.
he wandereth abroad for bread saying where is it? he knoweth
that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.
trouble and anguish shall make him afraid they shall prevail
against him as a king ready to the battle.
for he stretcheth out his hand against God and strengtheneth
himself against the almighty.
he runneth upon him even on his neck upon the thick bosses
of his bucklers
because he covereth his face with his fatness and maketh
collops of fat on his flanks.
and he dwelleth in desolate cities and in houses which no man
inhabiteth which are ready to become heaps.
he shall not be rich Neither shall his substance continue
Neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the
earth.
he shall not depart out of darkness the flame shall dry up
his branches and by the breath of his mouth shall he go away.
let not him that is deceived trust in vanity for vanity shall
be his recompence.
it shall be accomplished before his time and his branch shall
not be green.
he shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine and shall
cast off his flower as the olive.
for the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate and fire
shall consume the tabernacles of bribery.
they conceive mischief and bring forth vanity and their
belly prepareth deceit.
then Job answered and said
I have heard many such things miserable comforters are ye
all.
shall vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that
thou answerest?
I also could speak as ye do if your soul were in my soul s
stead I could heap up words against you and shake mine head
at you.
but I would strengthen you with my mouth and the moving of my
lips should asswage your grief.
though I speak my grief is not asswaged and though I
forbear what Am I eased?
but now he hath made me weary thou hast made desolate all my
company.
and thou hast filled me with wrinkles which is a witness
against me and my leanness rising up in me beareth witness to
my face.
he teareth me in his wrath who hateth me he gnasheth upon me
with his teeth mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me.
they have gaped upon me with their mouth they have smitten me
upon the cheek reproachfully they have gathered themselves
together against me.
God hath delivered me to the ungodly and turned me over into
the hands of the wicked.
I was at ease but he hath broken me asunder he hath also
taken me by my neck and shaken me to pieces and set me up
for his Mark.
his archers compass me round about he cleaveth my reins
asunder and doth not spare he poureth out my gall upon the
ground.
he breaketh me with breach upon breach he runneth upon me
like a giant.
I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin and defiled my horn in
the dust.
my face is foul with weeping and on my eyelids is the shadow
of death
not for any injustice in mine hands also my prayer is pure.
O earth cover not thou my blood and let my cry have no
place.
also now behold my witness is in heaven and my record is on
high.
my friends scorn me but mine eye poureth out tears unto God.
O that one might plead for a man with God as a man pleadeth
for his neighbour
when a few years are come then I shall go the way whence I
shall not return.
my breath is corrupt my days are extinct the graves are
ready for me.
are there not mockers with me? and doth not mine eye continue
in their provocation?
lay down now put me in a surety with thee who is he that
will strike hands with me?
for thou hast hid their heart from understanding therefore
shalt thou not exalt them.
he that speaketh flattery to his friends even the eyes of his
children shall fail.
he hath made me also a byword of the people and aforetime I
was as a tabret.
mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow and all my members
are as a shadow.
upright men shall be astonied at this and the innocent shall
stir up himself against the hypocrite.
the righteous also shall hold on his way and he that hath
clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.
but as for you all do ye return and come now for I cannot
find one wise man among you.
my days are past my purposes are broken off even the
thoughts of my heart.
they change the night into day the light is short because of
darkness.
if I wait the grave is mine house I have made my bed in the
darkness.
I have said to corruption thou art my father to the worm
thou art my mother and my sister.
and where is now my hope? as for my hope who shall see it?
they shall go down to the bars of the pit when our rest
together is in the dust.
then answered Bildad the Shuhite and said
how long will it be ere ye make an end of words? Mark and
afterwards we will speak.
wherefore are we counted as beasts and reputed vile in your
sight?
he teareth himself in his anger shall the earth be forsaken
for thee? and shall the rock be removed out of his place?
yea the light of the wicked shall be put out and the spark
of his fire shall not shine.
the light shall be dark in his tabernacle and his candle
shall be put out with him.
the steps of his strength shall be straitened and his own
counsel shall cast him down.
for he is cast into a net by his own feet and he walketh upon
a snare.
the gin shall take him by the heel and the robber shall
prevail against him.
the snare is laid for him in the ground and a trap for him in
the way.
terrors shall make him afraid on every side and shall drive
him to his feet.
his strength shall be hungerbitten and destruction shall be
ready at his side.
it shall devour the strength of his skin even the firstborn
of death shall devour his strength.
his confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle and it
shall bring him to the king of terrors.
it shall dwell in his tabernacle because it is none of his
brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
his roots shall be dried up beneath and above shall his
branch be cut off.
his remembrance shall perish from the earth and he shall have
no name in the street.
he shall be driven from light into darkness and chased out of
the world.
he shall Neither have son nor nephew among his people nor any
remaining in his dwellings.
they that come after him shall be astonied at his day as they
that went before were affrighted.
surely such are the dwellings of the wicked and this is the
place of him that knoweth not God.
then Job answered and said
how long will ye vex my soul and break me in pieces with
words?
these Ten times have ye reproached me ye are not ashamed that
ye make yourselves strange to me.
and be it indeed that I have erred mine error remaineth with
myself.
if indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me and plead
against me my reproach
know now that God hath overthrown me and hath compassed me
with his net.
behold I cry out of wrong but I Am not heard I cry aloud
but there is no judgment.
he hath fenced up my way that I cannot pass and he hath set
darkness in my paths.
he hath stripped me of my glory and taken the crown from my
head.
he hath destroyed me on every side and I Am gone and mine
hope hath he removed like a tree.
he hath also kindled his wrath against me and he counteth me
unto him as one of his enemies.
his troops come together and raise up their way against me
and encamp round about my tabernacle.
he hath put my brethren far from me and mine acquaintance are
verily estranged from me.
my kinsfolk have failed and my familiar friends have
forgotten me.
they that dwell in mine house and my maids count me for a
stranger I Am an alien in their sight.
I called my servant and he gave me no answer I intreated him
with my mouth.
my breath is strange to my wife though I intreated for the
children s sake of mine own body.
yea young children despised me I arose and they spake
against me.
all my inward friends abhorred me and they whom I loved are
turned against me.
my bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh and I Am escaped
with the skin of my teeth.
have pity upon me have pity upon me O ye my friends for the
hand of God hath touched me.
why do ye persecute me as God and are not satisfied with my
flesh?
oh that my words were now written oh that they were printed
in a book
that they were graven with an Iron pen and lead in the rock
for ever
for I know that my redeemer liveth and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the earth
and though after my skin worms destroy this body yet in my
flesh shall I see God
whom I shall see for myself and mine eyes shall behold and
not another though my reins be consumed within me.
but ye should say why persecute we him seeing the root of
the matter is found in me?
be ye afraid of the sword for wrath bringeth the punishments
of the sword that ye may know there is a judgment.
then answered Zophar the Naamathite and said
therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer and for this I
make haste.
I have heard the check of my reproach and the spirit of my
understanding causeth me to answer.
knowest thou not this of old since man was placed upon earth
that the triumphing of the wicked is short and the joy of the
hypocrite but for a moment?
though his excellency mount up to the heavens and his head
reach unto the clouds
yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung they which
have seen him shall say where is he?
he shall fly away as a dream and shall not be found yea he
shall be chased away as a vision of the night.
the eye also which saw him shall see him no more Neither
shall his place any more behold him.
his children shall seek to please the poor and his hands
shall restore their goods.
his bones are full of the Sin of his youth which shall lie
down with him in the dust.
though wickedness be sweet in his mouth though he hide it
under his tongue
though he spare it and forsake it not but keep it still
within his mouth
yet his meat in his bowels is turned it is the gall of asps
within him.
he hath swallowed down Riches and he shall vomit them up
again God shall cast them out of his belly.
he shall suck the poison of asps the viper s tongue shall
slay him.
he shall not see the rivers the floods the brooks of honey
and butter.
that which he laboured for shall he restore and shall not
swallow it down according to his substance shall the
restitution be and he shall not rejoice therein.
because he hath oppressed and hath forsaken the poor because
he hath violently taken away an house which he builded not
surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly he shall not
save of that which he desired.
there shall none of his meat be left therefore shall no man
look for his goods.
in the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits
every hand of the wicked shall come upon him.
when he is about to fill his belly God shall cast the fury of
his wrath upon him and shall rain it upon him while he is
eating.
he shall flee from the Iron weapon and the bow of steel shall
strike him through.
it is drawn and cometh out of the body yea the glittering
sword cometh out of his gall terrors are upon him.
all darkness shall be hid in his secret places a fire not
blown shall consume him it shall go ill with him that is left
in his tabernacle.
the heaven shall reveal his iniquity and the earth shall rise
up against him.
the increase of his house shall depart and his goods shall
flow away in the day of his wrath.
this is the portion of a wicked man from God and the heritage
appointed unto him by God.
but Job answered and said
hear diligently my speech and let this be your consolations.
suffer me that I may speak and after that I have spoken mock
on.
as for me is my complaint to man? and if it were so why
should not my spirit be troubled?
Mark me and be astonished and lay your hand upon your mouth.
even when I remember I Am afraid and trembling taketh hold on
my flesh.
wherefore do the wicked live become old yea are Mighty in
power?
their seed is established in their sight with them and their
offspring before their eyes.
their houses are safe from fear Neither is the rod of God
upon them.
their bull gendereth and faileth not their cow calveth and
casteth not her calf.
they send forth their little ones like a flock and their
children dance.
they take the timbrel and harp and rejoice at the sound of
the organ.
they spend their days in wealth and in a moment go down to
the grave.
therefore they say unto God depart from us for we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways.
what is the almighty that we should serve him? and what
profit should we have if we pray unto him?
lo their good is not in their hand the counsel of the wicked
is far from me.
how oft is the candle of the wicked put out and how oft
cometh their destruction upon them God distributeth sorrows
in his anger.
they are as stubble before the wind and as chaff that the
storm carrieth away.
God layeth up his iniquity for his children he rewardeth him
and he shall know it.
his eyes shall see his destruction and he shall drink of the
wrath of the almighty.
for what pleasure hath he in his house after him when the
number of his months is cut off in the midst?
shall any teach God knowledge? seeing he judgeth those that
are high.
one dieth in his full strength being wholly at ease and
quiet.
his breasts are full of milk and his bones are moistened with
marrow.
and another dieth in the bitterness of his soul and never
eateth with pleasure.
they shall lie down alike in the dust and the worms shall
cover them.
behold I know your thoughts and the devices which ye
wrongfully imagine against me.
for ye say where is the house of the prince? and where are
the dwelling places of the wicked?
have ye not asked them that go by the way? and do ye not know
their tokens
that the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction? they
shall be brought forth to the day of wrath.
who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him
what he hath done?
yet shall he be brought to the grave and shall remain in the
tomb.
the clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him and every man
shall draw after him as there are innumerable before him.
how then comfort ye me in vain seeing in your answers there
remaineth falsehood?
then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said
can a man be profitable unto God as he that is wise may be
profitable unto himself?
is it any pleasure to the almighty that thou art righteous?
or is it gain to him that thou makest thy ways perfect?
will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he enter with thee
into judgment?
is not thy wickedness great? and thine iniquities infinite?
for thou hast taken a pledge from thy brother for nought and
stripped the naked of their clothing.
thou hast not given water to the weary to drink and thou hast
withholden bread from the hungry.
but as for the Mighty man he had the earth and the
honourable man dwelt in it.
thou hast sent widows away empty and the arms of the
fatherless have been broken.
therefore snares are round about thee and sudden fear
troubleth thee
or darkness that thou canst not see and abundance of waters
cover thee.
is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the height of
the stars how high they are
and thou sayest how doth God know? can he judge through the
dark cloud?
thick clouds are a covering to him that he seeth not and he
walketh in the circuit of heaven.
hast thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?
which were cut down out of time whose foundation was
overflown with a flood
which said unto God depart from us and what can the almighty
do for them?
yet he filled their houses with good things but the counsel
of the wicked is far from me.
the righteous see it and are glad and the innocent laugh
them to scorn.
whereas our substance is not cut down but the remnant of them
the fire consumeth.
acquaint now thyself with him and be at peace thereby good
shall come unto thee.
receive I pray thee the law from his mouth and lay up his
words in thine heart.
if thou return to the almighty thou shalt be built up thou
shalt put away iniquity far from thy tabernacles.
then shalt thou lay up gold as dust and the gold of Ophir as
the stones of the brooks.
yea the almighty shall be thy defence and thou shalt have
plenty of Silver.
for then shalt thou have thy delight in the almighty and
shalt lift up thy face unto God.
thou shalt make thy prayer unto him and he shall hear thee
and thou shalt pay thy vows.
thou shalt also decree a thing and it shall be established
unto thee and the light shall shine upon thy ways.
when men are cast down then thou shalt say there is lifting
up and he shall save the humble person.
he shall deliver the island of the innocent and it is
delivered by the pureness of thine hands.
then Job answered and said
even to day is my complaint bitter my stroke is heavier than
my groaning.
oh that I knew where I might find him that I might come even
to his seat
I would order my cause before him and fill my mouth with
arguments.
I would know the words which he would answer me and
understand what he would say unto me.
will he plead against me with his great power? no but he
would put strength in me.
there the righteous might dispute with him so should I be
delivered for ever from my judge.
behold I go forward but he is not there and backward but I
cannot perceive him
on the left hand where he doth work but I cannot behold him
he hideth himself on the right hand that I cannot see him
but he knoweth the way that I take when he hath tried me I
shall come forth as gold.
my foot hath held his steps his way have I kept and not
declined.
Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips I
have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary
food.
but he is in one mind and who can turn him? and what his soul
desireth even that he doeth.
for he performeth the thing that is appointed for me and many
such things are with him.
therefore Am I troubled at his presence when I consider I Am
afraid of him.
for God maketh my heart soft and the almighty troubleth me
because I was not cut off before the darkness Neither hath he
covered the darkness from my face.
why seeing times are not hidden from the almighty do they
that know him not see his days?
some remove the landmarks they violently take away flocks
and feed thereof.
they drive away the ass of the fatherless they take the
widow s ox for a pledge.
they turn the needy out of the way the poor of the earth hide
themselves together.
behold as wild asses in the desert go they forth to their
work rising betimes for a prey the wilderness yieldeth food
for them and for their children.
they reap every one his corn in the field and they gather the
vintage of the wicked.
they cause the naked to lodge without clothing that they have
no covering in the cold.
they are wet with the showers of the mountains and embrace
the rock for want of a shelter.
they pluck the fatherless from the breast and take a pledge
of the poor.
they cause him to go naked without clothing and they take
away the sheaf from the hungry
which make oil within their walls and tread their
winepresses and suffer thirst.
men groan from out of the city and the soul of the wounded
crieth out yet God layeth not folly to them.
they are of those that rebel against the light they know not
the ways thereof nor abide in the paths thereof.
the murderer rising with the light killeth the poor and needy
and in the night is as a thief.
the eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight
saying no eye shall see me and disguiseth his face.
in the dark they dig through houses which they had marked for
themselves in the daytime they know not the light.
for the morning is to them even as the shadow of death if one
know them they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.
he is swift as the waters their portion is cursed in the
earth he beholdeth not the way of the vineyards.
drought and heat consume the snow waters so doth the grave
those which have sinned.
the womb shall forget him the worm shall feed sweetly on him
he shall be no more remembered and wickedness shall be broken
as a tree.
he evil entreateth the barren that beareth not and doeth not
good to the widow.
he draweth also the Mighty with his power he riseth up and
no man is sure of life.
though it be given him to be in safety whereon he resteth
yet his eyes are upon their ways.
they are exalted for a little while but are gone and brought
low they are taken out of the way as all other and cut off
as the tops of the ears of corn.
and if it be not so now who will make me a liar and make my
speech nothing worth?
then answered Bildad the Shuhite and said
dominion and fear are with him he maketh peace in his high
places.
is there any number of his armies? and upon whom doth not his
light Arise?
how then can man be justified with God? or how can he be clean
that is born of a woman?
behold even to the moon and it shineth not yea the stars
are not pure in his sight.
how Much less man that is a worm? and the son of man which
is a worm?
but Job answered and said
how hast thou helped him that is without power? how savest
thou the arm that hath no strength?
how hast thou counselled him that hath no wisdom? and how hast
thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?
to whom hast thou uttered words? and whose spirit came from
thee?
dead things are formed from under the waters and the
inhabitants thereof.
hell is naked before him and destruction hath no covering.
he stretcheth out the north over the empty place and hangeth
the earth upon nothing.
he bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds and the cloud is
not rent under them.
he holdeth back the face of his throne and spreadeth his
cloud upon it.
he hath compassed the waters with bounds until the day and
night come to an end.
the pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his
reproof.
he divideth the sea with his power and by his understanding
he smiteth through the proud.
by his spirit he hath garnished the heavens his hand hath
formed the crooked serpent.
lo these are parts of his ways but how little a portion is
heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand?
moreover Job continued his parable and said
as God liveth who hath taken away my judgment and the
almighty who hath vexed my soul
all the while my breath is in me and the spirit of God is in
my nostrils
my lips shall not speak wickedness nor my tongue utter
deceit.
God forbid that I should justify you till I die I will not
remove mine integrity from me.
my righteousness I hold fast and will not let it go my heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live.
let mine enemy be as the wicked and he that riseth up against
me as the unrighteous.
for what is the hope of the hypocrite though he hath gained
when God taketh away his soul?
will God hear his cry when trouble cometh upon him?
will he delight himself in the almighty? will he always call
upon God?
I will teach you by the hand of God that which is with the
almighty will I not conceal.
behold all ye yourselves have seen it why then are ye thus
altogether vain?
this is the portion of a wicked man with God and the heritage
of oppressors which they shall receive of the almighty.
if his children be multiplied it is for the sword and his
offspring shall not be satisfied with bread.
those that remain of him shall be buried in death and his
widows shall not weep.
though he heap up Silver as the dust and prepare raiment as
the clay
he may prepare it but the just shall put it on and the
innocent shall divide the Silver.
he buildeth his house as a moth and as a booth that the
keeper maketh.
the rich man shall lie down but he shall not be gathered he
openeth his eyes and he is not.
terrors take hold on him as waters a tempest stealeth him
away in the night.
the east wind carrieth him away and he departeth and as a
storm hurleth him out of his place.
for God shall cast upon him and not spare he would fain flee
out of his hand.
men shall clap their hands at him and shall hiss him out of
his place.
surely there is a vein for the Silver and a place for gold
where they fine it.
Iron is taken out of the earth and brass is molten out of the
stone.
he setteth an end to darkness and searcheth out all
perfection the stones of darkness and the shadow of death.
the flood breaketh out from the inhabitant even the waters
forgotten of the foot they are dried up they are gone away
from men.
as for the earth out of it cometh bread and under it is
turned up as it were fire.
the stones of it are the place of sapphires and it hath dust
of gold.
there is a path which no fowl knoweth and which the vulture s
eye hath not seen
the lion s whelps have not trodden it nor the fierce lion
passed by it.
he putteth forth his hand upon the rock he overturneth the
mountains by the roots.
he cutteth out rivers among the rocks and his eye seeth every
precious thing.
he bindeth the floods from overflowing and the thing that is
hid bringeth he forth to light.
but where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of
understanding?
man knoweth not the price thereof Neither is it found in the
land of the living.
the depth saith it is not in me and the sea saith it is not
with me.
it cannot be gotten for gold Neither shall Silver be weighed
for the price thereof.
it cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir with the precious
Onyx or the sapphire.
the gold and the crystal cannot equal it and the exchange of
it shall not be for jewels of fine gold.
no mention shall be made of coral or of pearls for the price
of wisdom is above rubies.
the topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it Neither shall it be
valued with pure gold.
whence then cometh wisdom? and where is the place of
understanding?
seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living and kept close
from the fowls of the air.
destruction and death say we have heard the fame thereof with
our ears.
God understandeth the way thereof and he knoweth the place
thereof.
for he looketh to the ends of the earth and seeth under the
whole heaven
to make the weight for the winds and he weigheth the waters
by measure.
when he made a decree for the rain and a way for the
lightning of the thunder
then did he see it and declare it he prepared it yea and
searched it out.
and unto man he said behold the fear of the lord that is
wisdom and to depart from evil is understanding.
moreover Job continued his parable and said
oh that I were as in months past as in the days when God
preserved me
when his candle shined upon my head and when by his light I
walked through darkness
as I was in the days of my youth when the secret of God was
upon my tabernacle
when the almighty was yet with me when my children were about
me
when I washed my steps with butter and the rock poured me out
rivers of oil
when I went out to the gate through the city when I prepared
my seat in the street
the young men saw me and hid themselves and the aged arose
and stood up.
the princes refrained talking and laid their hand on their
mouth.
the nobles held their peace and their tongue cleaved to the
roof of their mouth.
when the ear heard me then it blessed me and when the eye
saw me it gave witness to me
because I delivered the poor that cried and the fatherless
and him that had none to help him.
the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me and
I caused the widow s heart to sing for joy.
I put on righteousness and it clothed me my judgment was as
a robe and a diadem.
I was eyes to the blind and feet was I to the lame.
I was a father to the poor and the cause which I knew not I
searched out.
and I brake the jaws of the wicked and plucked the spoil out
of his teeth.
then I said I shall die in my nest and I shall multiply my
days as the sand.
my root was spread out by the waters and the dew lay all
night upon my branch.
my glory was fresh in me and my bow was renewed in my hand.
unto me men gave ear and waited and kept silence at my
counsel.
after my words they spake not again and my speech dropped
upon them.
and they waited for me as for the rain and they opened their
mouth wide as for the latter rain.
if I laughed on them they believed it not and the light of
my countenance they cast not down.
I chose out their way and sat chief and dwelt as a king in
the army as one that comforteth the mourners.
but now they that are younger than I have me in derision
whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs
of my flock.
yea whereto might the strength of their hands profit me in
whom old age was perished?
for want and famine they were solitary fleeing into the
wilderness in former time desolate and waste.
who cut up mallows by the bushes and juniper roots for their
meat.
they were driven forth from among men they cried after them
as after a thief
to dwell in the cliffs of the valleys in caves of the earth
and in the rocks.
among the bushes they brayed under the nettles they were
gathered together.
they were children of fools yea children of base men they
were viler than the earth.
and now Am I their song yea I Am their byword.
they abhor me they flee far from me and spare not to spit in
my face.
because he hath loosed my cord and afflicted me they have
also let loose the bridle before me.
upon my right hand rise the youth they push away my feet and
they raise up against me the ways of their destruction.
they mar my path they set forward my calamity they have no
helper.
they came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters in the
desolation they rolled themselves upon me.
terrors are turned upon me they pursue my soul as the wind
and my welfare passeth away as a cloud.
and now my soul is poured out upon me the days of affliction
have taken hold upon me.
my bones are pierced in me in the night season and my sinews
take no rest.
by the great force of my disease is my garment changed it
bindeth me about as the collar of my coat.
he hath cast me into the mire and I Am become like dust and
ashes.
I cry unto thee and thou dost not hear me I stand up and
thou regardest me not.
thou art become cruel to me with thy strong hand thou
opposest thyself against me.
thou liftest me up to the wind thou causest me to ride upon
it and dissolvest my substance.
for I know that thou wilt bring me to death and to the house
appointed for all living.
howbeit he will not stretch out his hand to the grave though
they cry in his destruction.
did not I weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul
grieved for the poor?
when I looked for good then evil came unto me and when I
waited for light there came darkness.
my bowels boiled and rested not the days of affliction
prevented me.
I went mourning without the sun I stood up and I cried in
the congregation.
I Am a brother to dragons and a companion to owls.
my skin is black upon me and my bones are burned with heat.
my harp also is turned to mourning and my organ into the
voice of them that weep.
I made a covenant with mine eyes why then should I think upon
a maid?
for what portion of God is there from above? and what
inheritance of the almighty from on high?
is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to
the workers of iniquity?
doth not he see my ways and count all my steps?
if I have walked with vanity or if my foot hath hasted to
deceit
let me be weighed in an even balance that God may know mine
integrity.
if my step hath turned out of the way and mine heart walked
after mine eyes and if any blot hath cleaved to mine hands
then let me sow and let another eat yea let my offspring be
rooted out.
if mine heart have been deceived by a woman or if I have laid
wait at my neighbour s door
then let my wife grind unto another and let others bow down
upon her.
for this is an heinous crime yea it is an iniquity to be
punished by the judges.
for it is a fire that consumeth to destruction and would root
out all mine increase.
if I did despise the cause of my manservant or of my
maidservant when they contended with me
what then shall I do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth
what shall I answer him?
did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb?
if I have withheld the poor from their desire or have caused
the eyes of the widow to fail
or have eaten my morsel myself alone and the fatherless hath
not eaten thereof
 for from my youth he was brought up with me as with a
father and I have guided her from my mother s womb
if I have seen any perish for want of clothing or any poor
without covering
if his loins have not blessed me and if he were not warmed
with the fleece of my sheep
if I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless when I saw
my help in the gate
then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade and mine arm be
broken from the bone.
for destruction from God was a terror to me and by reason of
his highness I could not endure.
if I have made gold my hope or have said to the fine gold
thou art my confidence
if I rejoice because my wealth was great and because mine
hand had gotten Much
if I beheld the sun when it shined or the moon walking in
brightness
and my heart hath been secretly enticed or my mouth hath
kissed my hand
this also were an iniquity to be punished by the judge for I
should have denied the God that is above.
if I rejoice at the destruction of him that hated me or
lifted up myself when evil found him
Neither have I suffered my mouth to Sin by wishing a curse to
his soul.
if the men of my tabernacle said not oh that we had of his
flesh we cannot be satisfied.
the stranger did not lodge in the street but I opened my
doors to the traveller.
if I covered my transgressions as Adam by hiding mine
iniquity in my bosom
did I fear a great multitude or did the contempt of families
terrify me that I kept silence and went not out of the door?
oh that one would hear me behold my desire is that the
almighty would answer me and that mine adversary had written
a book.
surely I would take it upon my shoulder and bind it as a
crown to me.
I would declare unto him the number of my steps as a prince
would I go near unto him.
if my land cry against me or that the furrows likewise
thereof complain
if I have eaten the fruits thereof without money or have
caused the owners thereof to lose their life
let thistles grow instead of wheat and cockle instead of
barley. the words of Job are ended.
so these three men ceased to answer Job because he was
righteous in his own eyes.
then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the
Buzite of the kindred of Ram against Job was his wrath
kindled because he justified himself rather than God.
also against his three friends was his wrath kindled because
they had found no answer and yet had condemned Job.
now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken because they were
elder than he.
when Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these
three men then his wrath was kindled.
and Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said I
Am young and ye are very old wherefore I was afraid and
durst not shew you mine opinion.
I said days should speak and multitude of years should teach
wisdom.
but there is a spirit in man and the inspiration of the
almighty giveth them understanding.
great men are not always wise Neither do the aged understand
judgment.
therefore I said hearken to me I also will shew mine
opinion.
behold I waited for your words I gave ear to your reasons
whilst ye searched out what to say.
yea I attended unto you and behold there was none of you
that convinced Job or that answered his words
lest ye should say we have found out wisdom God thrusteth
him down not man.
now he hath not directed his words against me Neither will I
answer him with your speeches.
they were amazed they answered no more they left off
speaking.
when I had waited for they spake not but stood still and
answered no more
I said I will answer also my part I also will shew mine
opinion.
for I Am full of matter the spirit within me constraineth me.
behold my belly is as wine which hath no vent it is ready to
burst like new bottles.
I will speak that I may be refreshed I will open my lips and
answer.
let me not I pray you accept any man s person Neither let
me give flattering titles unto man.
for I know not to give flattering titles in so doing my maker
would soon take me away.
wherefore Job I pray thee hear my speeches and hearken to
all my words.
behold now I have opened my mouth my tongue hath spoken in
my mouth.
my words shall be of the uprightness of my heart and my lips
shall utter knowledge clearly.
the spirit of God hath made me and the breath of the almighty
hath given me life.
if thou canst answer me set thy words in order before me
stand up.
behold I Am according to thy wish in God s stead I also Am
formed out of the clay.
behold my terror shall not make thee afraid Neither shall my
hand be heavy upon thee.
surely thou hast spoken in mine hearing and I have heard the
voice of thy words saying
I Am clean without transgression I Am innocent Neither is
there iniquity in me.
behold he findeth occasions against me he counteth me for
his enemy
he putteth my feet in the stocks he marketh all my paths.
behold in this thou art not just I will answer thee that
God is greater than man.
why dost thou strive against him? for he giveth not account of
any of his matters.
for God speaketh once yea twice yet man perceiveth it not.
in a dream in a vision of the night when deep sleep falleth
upon men in slumberings upon the bed
then he openeth the ears of men and sealeth their
instruction
that he may withdraw man from his purpose and hide pride from
man.
he keepeth back his soul from the pit and his life from
perishing by the sword.
he is chastened also with pain upon his bed and the multitude
of his bones with strong pain
so that his life abhorreth bread and his soul dainty meat.
his flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen and his
bones that were not seen stick out.
yea his soul draweth near unto the grave and his life to the
destroyers.
if there be a messenger with him an interpreter one among a
thousand to shew unto man his uprightness
then he is gracious unto him and saith deliver him from
going down to the pit I have found a ransom.
his flesh shall be fresher than a child s he shall return to
the days of his youth
he shall pray unto God and he will be favourable unto him
and he shall see his face with joy for he will render unto
man his righteousness.
he looketh upon men and if any say I have sinned and
perverted that which was right and it profited me not
he will deliver his soul from going into the pit and his life
shall see the light.
lo all these things worketh God oftentimes with man
to bring back his soul from the pit to be enlightened with
the light of the living.
Mark well O Job hearken unto me hold thy peace and I will
speak.
if thou hast anything to say answer me speak for I desire
to justify thee.
if not hearken unto me hold thy peace and I shall teach
thee wisdom.
furthermore Elihu answered and said
hear my words O ye wise men and give ear unto me ye that
have knowledge.
for the ear trieth words as the mouth tasteth meat.
let us choose to us judgment let us know among ourselves what
is good.
for Job hath said I Am righteous and God hath taken away my
judgment.
should I lie against my right? my wound is incurable without
transgression.
what man is like Job who drinketh up scorning like water?
which goeth in company with the workers of iniquity and
walketh with wicked men.
for he hath said it profiteth a man nothing that he should
delight himself with God.
therefore hearken unto me ye men of understanding far be it
from God that he should do wickedness and from the almighty
that he should commit iniquity.
for the work of a man shall he render unto him and cause
every man to find according to his ways.
yea surely God will not do wickedly Neither will the
almighty pervert judgment.
who hath given him a charge over the earth? or who hath
disposed the whole world?
if he set his heart upon man if he gather unto himself his
spirit and his breath
all flesh shall perish together and man shall turn again unto
dust.
if now thou hast understanding hear this hearken to the
voice of my words.
shall even he that hateth right govern? and wilt thou condemn
him that is most just?
is it fit to say to a king thou art wicked? and to princes
ye are ungodly?
how Much less to him that accepteth not the persons of
princes nor regardeth the rich more than the poor? for they
all are the work of his hands.
in a moment shall they die and the people shall be troubled
at midnight and pass away and the Mighty shall be taken away
without hand.
for his eyes are upon the ways of man and he seeth all his
goings.
there is no darkness nor shadow of death where the workers
of iniquity may hide themselves.
for he will not lay upon man more than right that he should
enter into judgment with God.
he shall break in pieces Mighty men without number and set
others in their stead.
therefore he knoweth their works and he overturneth them in
the night so that they are destroyed.
he striketh them as wicked men in the open sight of others
because they turned back from him and would not consider any
of his ways
so that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto him and
he heareth the cry of the afflicted.
when he giveth quietness who then can make trouble? and when
he hideth his face who then can behold him? whether it be
done against a nation or against a man only
that the hypocrite reign not lest the people be ensnared.
surely it is meet to be said unto God I have borne
chastisement I will not offend any more
that which I see not teach thou me if I have done iniquity I
will do no more.
should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it
whether thou refuse or whether thou choose and not I
therefore speak what thou knowest.
let men of understanding tell me and let a wise man hearken
unto me.
Job hath spoken without knowledge and his words were without
wisdom.
my desire is that Job may be tried unto the end because of his
answers for wicked men.
for he addeth rebellion unto his Sin he clappeth his hands
among us and multiplieth his words against God.
Elihu spake moreover and said
thinkest thou this to be right that thou saidst my
righteousness is more than God s?
for thou saidst what advantage will it be unto thee? and
what profit shall I have if I be cleansed from my Sin?
I will answer thee and thy companions with thee.
look unto the heavens and see and behold the clouds which
are higher than thou.
if thou sinnest what doest thou against him? or if thy
transgressions be multiplied what doest thou unto him?
if thou be righteous what givest thou him? or what receiveth
he of thine hand?
thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art and thy
righteousness may profit the son of man.
by reason of the multitude of oppressions they make the
oppressed to cry they cry out by reason of the arm of the
Mighty.
but none saith where is God my maker who giveth songs in the
night
who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth and maketh
us wiser than the fowls of heaven?
there they cry but none giveth answer because of the pride
of evil men.
surely God will not hear vanity Neither will the almighty
regard it.
although thou sayest thou shalt not see him yet judgment is
before him therefore trust thou in him.
but now because it is not so he hath visited in his anger
yet he knoweth it not in great extremity
therefore doth Job open his mouth in vain he multiplieth
words without knowledge.
Elihu also proceeded and said
suffer me a little and I will shew thee that I have yet to
speak on God s behalf.
I will fetch my knowledge from afar and will ascribe
righteousness to my maker.
for truly my words shall not be false he that is perfect in
knowledge is with thee.
behold God is Mighty and despiseth not any he is Mighty in
strength and wisdom.
he preserveth not the life of the wicked but giveth right to
the poor.
he withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous but with kings
are they on the throne yea he doth establish them for ever
and they are exalted.
and if they be bound in fetters and be holden in cords of
affliction
then he sheweth them their work and their transgressions that
they have exceeded.
he openeth also their ear to discipline and commandeth that
they return from iniquity.
if they obey and serve him they shall spend their days in
prosperity and their years in pleasures.
but if they obey not they shall perish by the sword and they
shall die without knowledge.
but the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath they cry not when
he bindeth them.
they die in youth and their life is among the unclean.
he delivereth the poor in his affliction and openeth their
ears in oppression.
even so would he have removed thee out of the strait into a
broad place where there is no straitness and that which
should be set on thy table should be full of fatness.
but thou hast fulfilled the judgment of the wicked judgment
and justice take hold on thee.
because there is wrath beware lest he take thee away with his
stroke then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.
will he esteem thy Riches? no not gold nor all the forces of
strength.
desire not the night when people are cut off in their place.
take heed regard not iniquity for this hast thou chosen
rather than affliction.
behold God exalteth by his power who teacheth like him?
who hath enjoined him his way? or who can say thou hast
wrought iniquity?
remember that thou magnify his work which men behold.
every man may see it man may behold it afar off.
behold God is great and we know him not Neither can the
number of his years be searched out.
for he maketh small the drops of water they pour down rain
according to the vapour thereof
which the clouds do drop and distil upon man abundantly.
also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds or the
noise of his tabernacle?
behold he spreadeth his light upon it and covereth the
bottom of the sea.
for by them judgeth he the people he giveth meat in
abundance.
with clouds he covereth the light and commandeth it not to
shine by the cloud that cometh betwixt.
the noise thereof sheweth concerning it the cattle also
concerning the vapour.
at this also my heart trembleth and is moved out of his
place.
hear attentively the noise of his voice and the sound that
goeth out of his mouth.
he directeth it under the whole heaven and his lightning unto
the ends of the earth.
after it a voice roareth he thundereth with the voice of his
excellency and he will not stay them when his voice is heard.
God thundereth marvellously with his voice great things doeth
he which we cannot comprehend.
for he saith to the snow be thou on the earth likewise to
the small rain and to the great rain of his strength.
he sealeth up the hand of every man that all men may know his
work.
then the beasts go into dens and remain in their places.
out of the south cometh the whirlwind and cold out of the
north.
by the breath of God frost is given and the breadth of the
waters is straitened.
also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud he scattereth
his bright cloud
and it is turned round about by his counsels that they may do
whatsoever he commandeth them upon the face of the world in
the earth.
he causeth it to come whether for correction or for his
land or for mercy.
hearken unto this O Job stand still and consider the
wondrous works of God.
dost thou know when God disposed them and caused the light of
his cloud to shine?
dost thou know the balancings of the clouds the wondrous
works of him which is perfect in knowledge?
how thy garments are warm when he quieteth the earth by the
south wind?
hast thou with him spread out the sky which is strong and as
a molten looking glass?
teach us what we shall say unto him for we cannot order our
speech by reason of darkness.
shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speak surely he
shall be swallowed up.
and now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds
but the wind passeth and cleanseth them.
fair weather cometh out of the north with God is terrible
majesty.
touching the almighty we cannot find him out he is excellent
in power and in judgment and in plenty of justice he will
not afflict.
men do therefore fear him he respecteth not any that are wise
of heart.
then the lord answered Job out of the whirlwind and said
who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
gird up now thy loins like a man for I will demand of thee
and answer thou me.
where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?
declare if thou hast understanding.
who hath laid the measures thereof if thou knowest? or who
hath stretched the line upon it?
whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid
the corner stone thereof
when the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God
shouted for joy?
or who shut up the sea with doors when it brake forth as if
it had issued out of the womb?
when I made the cloud the garment thereof and thick darkness
a swaddlingband for it
and brake up for it my decreed place and set bars and doors
and said hitherto shalt thou come but no further and here
shall thy proud waves be stayed?
hast thou commanded the morning since thy days and caused the
dayspring to know his place
that it might take hold of the ends of the earth that the
wicked might be shaken out of it?
it is turned as clay to the seal and they stand as a garment.
and from the wicked their light is withholden and the high
arm shall be broken.
hast thou entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou
walked in the search of the depth?
have the gates of death been opened unto thee? or hast thou
seen the doors of the shadow of death?
hast thou perceived the breadth of the earth? declare if thou
knowest it all.
where is the way where light dwelleth? and as for darkness
where is the place thereof
that thou shouldest take it to the bound thereof and that
thou shouldest know the paths to the house thereof?
knowest thou it because thou wast then born? or because the
number of thy days is great?
hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or hast thou
seen the treasures of the hail
which I have reserved against the time of trouble against the
day of battle and war?
by what way is the light parted which scattereth the east
wind upon the earth?
who hath divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters
or a way for the lightning of thunder
to cause it to rain on the earth where no man is on the
wilderness wherein there is no man
to satisfy the desolate and waste ground and to cause the bud
of the tender herb to spring forth?
hath the rain a father? or who hath begotten the drops of dew?
out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven
who hath gendered it?
the waters are hid as with a stone and the face of the deep
is frozen.
canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades or loose the
Bands of Orion?
canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or canst thou
guide Arcturus with his sons?
knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? canst thou set the
dominion thereof in the earth?
canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds that abundance of
waters may cover thee?
canst thou send lightnings that they may go and say unto
thee here we are?
who hath put wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given
understanding to the heart?
who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the
bottles of heaven
when the dust groweth into hardness and the clods cleave fast
together?
wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion? or fill the appetite of
the young lions
when they couch in their dens and abide in the covert to lie
in wait?
who provideth for the raven his food? when his young ones cry
unto God they wander for lack of meat.
knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring
forth? or canst thou Mark when the hinds do calve?
canst thou number the months that they fulfil? or knowest thou
the time when they bring forth?
they bow themselves they bring forth their young ones they
cast out their sorrows.
their young ones are in good liking they grow up with corn
they go forth and return not unto them.
who hath sent out the wild ass free? or who hath loosed the
Bands of the wild ass?
whose house I have made the wilderness and the barren land
his dwellings.
he scorneth the multitude of the city Neither regardeth he
the crying of the driver.
the range of the mountains is his pasture and he searcheth
after every green thing.
will the unicorn be willing to serve thee or abide by thy
crib?
canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow? or
will he harrow the valleys after thee?
wilt thou trust him because his strength is great? or wilt
thou leave thy labour to him?
wilt thou believe him that he will bring home thy seed and
gather it into thy barn?
Gavest thou the goodly wings unto the peacocks? or wings and
feathers unto the ostrich?
which leaveth her eggs in the earth and warmeth them in dust
and forgetteth that the foot may crush them or that the wild
beast may break them.
she is hardened against her young ones as though they were
not her s her labour is in vain without fear
because God hath deprived her of wisdom Neither hath he
imparted to her understanding.
what time she lifteth up herself on high she scorneth the
horse and his rider.
hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck
with thunder?
canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the glory of his
nostrils is terrible.
he paweth in the valley and rejoiceth in his strength he
goeth on to meet the armed men.
he mocketh at fear and is not affrighted Neither turneth he
back from the sword.
the quiver rattleth against him the glittering spear and the
shield.
he swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage Neither
believeth he that it is the sound of the trumpet.
he saith among the trumpets ha ha and he smelleth the
battle afar off the thunder of the captains and the
shouting.
doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom and stretch her wings toward
the south?
doth the eagle mount up at thy command and make her nest on
high?
she dwelleth and abideth on the rock upon the crag of the
rock and the strong place.
from thence she seeketh the prey and her eyes behold afar
off.
her young ones also suck up blood and where the slain are
there is she.
moreover the lord answered Job and said
shall he that contendeth with the almighty instruct him? he
that reproveth God let him answer it.
then Job answered the lord and said
behold I Am vile what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine
hand upon my mouth.
once have I spoken but I will not answer yea twice but I
will proceed no further.
then answered the lord unto Job out of the whirlwind and
said
gird up thy loins now like a man I will demand of thee and
declare thou unto me.
wilt thou also disannul my judgment? wilt thou condemn me
that thou mayest be righteous?
hast thou an arm like God? or canst thou thunder with a voice
like him?
deck thyself now with majesty and excellency and array
thyself with glory and beauty.
cast abroad the rage of thy wrath and behold every one that
is proud and abase him.
look on every one that is proud and bring him low and tread
down the wicked in their place.
hide them in the dust together and bind their faces in
secret.
then will I also confess unto thee that thine own right hand
can save thee.
behold now behemoth which I made with thee he eateth grass
as an ox.
lo now his strength is in his loins and his force is in the
navel of his belly.
he moveth his tail like a cedar the sinews of his stones are
wrapped together.
his bones are as strong pieces of brass his bones are like
bars of Iron.
he is the chief of the ways of God he that made him can make
his sword to approach unto him.
surely the mountains bring him forth food where all the
beasts of the field play.
he lieth under the shady trees in the covert of the reed and
fens.
the shady trees cover him with their shadow the willows of
the brook compass him about.
behold he drinketh up a river and hasteth not he trusteth
that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth.
he taketh it with his eyes his nose pierceth through snares.
canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with
a cord which thou lettest down?
canst thou put an hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through
with a thorn?
will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft
words unto thee?
will he make a covenant with thee? wilt thou take him for a
servant for ever?
wilt thou play with him as with a bird? or wilt thou bind him
for thy maidens?
shall the companions make a banquet of him? shall they part
him among the merchants?
canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with
fish spears?
lay thine hand upon him remember the battle do no more.
behold the hope of him is in vain shall not one be cast down
even at the sight of him?
none is so fierce that dare stir him up who then is able to
stand before me?
who hath prevented me that I should repay him? whatsoever is
under the whole heaven is mine.
I will not conceal his parts nor his power nor his comely
proportion.
who can discover the face of his garment? or who can come to
him with his double bridle?
who can open the doors of his face? his teeth are terrible
round about.
his scales are his pride shut up together as with a close
seal.
one is so near to another that no air can come between them.
they are joined one to another they stick together that they
cannot be sundered.
by his neesings a light doth shine and his eyes are like the
eyelids of the morning.
out of his mouth go burning lamps and sparks of fire leap
out.
out of his nostrils goeth smoke as out of a seething pot or
caldron.
his breath kindleth coals and a flame goeth out of his mouth.
in his neck remaineth strength and sorrow is turned into joy
before him.
the flakes of his flesh are joined together they are firm in
themselves they cannot be moved.
his heart is as firm as a stone yea as hard as a piece of
the nether millstone.
when he raiseth up himself the Mighty are afraid by reason
of breakings they purify themselves.
the sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold the spear
the dart nor the habergeon.
he esteemeth Iron as straw and brass as rotten wood.
the arrow cannot make him flee slingstones are turned with
him into stubble.
darts are counted as stubble he laugheth at the shaking of a
spear.
Sharp stones are under him he spreadeth Sharp pointed things
upon the mire.
he maketh the deep to boil like a pot he maketh the sea like
a pot of ointment.
he maketh a path to shine after him one would think the deep
to be hoary.
upon earth there is not his like who is made without fear.
he beholdeth all high things he is a king over all the
children of pride.
then Job answered the lord and said
I know that thou canst do every thing and that no thought can
be withholden from thee.
who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge? therefore
have I uttered that I understood not things too wonderful for
me which I knew not.
hear I beseech thee and I will speak I will demand of thee
and declare thou unto me.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear but now mine
eye seeth thee.
wherefore I abhor myself and repent in dust and ashes.
and it was so that after the lord had spoken these words unto
Job the lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite my wrath is
kindled against thee and against thy two friends for ye have
not spoken of me the thing that is right as my servant Job
hath.
therefore take unto you now seven bullocks and seven rams and
go to my servant Job and offer up for yourselves a burnt
offering and my servant Job shall pray for you for him will
I accept lest I deal with you after your folly in that ye
have not spoken of me the thing which is right like my
servant Job.
so Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the
Naamathite went and did according as the lord commanded them
the lord also accepted Job.
and the lord turned the captivity of Job when he prayed for
his friends also the lord gave Job twice as Much as he had
before.
then came there unto him all his brethren and all his
sisters and all they that had been of his acquaintance
before and did eat bread with him in his house and they
bemoaned him and comforted him over all the evil that the
lord had brought upon him every man also gave him a piece of
money and every one an earring of gold.
so the lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his
beginning for he had fourteen thousand sheep and six
thousand camels and a thousand yoke of oxen and a thousand
she asses.
he had also seven sons and three daughters.
and he called the name of the first Jemima and the name of
the second Kezia and the name of the third Kerenhappuch.
and in all the land were no women found so fair as the
daughters of Job and their father gave them inheritance among
their brethren.
after this lived Job an hundred and forty years and saw his
sons and his sons sons even four generations.
so Job died being old and full of days.
blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the
ungodly nor standeth in the way of sinners nor sitteth in
the seat of the scornful.
but his delight is in the law of the lord and in his law doth
he meditate day and night.
and he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water
that bringeth forth his fruit in his season his leaf also
shall not wither and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.
the ungodly are not so but are like the chaff which the wind
driveth away.
therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment nor
sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
for the lord knoweth the way of the righteous but the way of
the ungodly shall perish.
why do the heathen rage and the people imagine a vain thing?
the kings of the earth set themselves and the rulers take
counsel together against the lord and against his anointed
saying
let us break their Bands asunder and cast away their cords
from us.
he that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh the lord shall
have them in derision.
then shall he speak unto them in his wrath and vex them in
his sore displeasure.
yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.
I will declare the decree the lord hath said unto me thou
art my son this day have I begotten thee.
ask of me and I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession.
thou shalt break them with a rod of Iron thou shalt dash them
in pieces like a potter s vessel.
be wise now therefore O ye kings be instructed ye judges of
the earth.
serve the lord with fear and rejoice with trembling.
Kiss the son lest he be angry and ye perish from the way
when his wrath is kindled but a little. blessed are all they
that put their trust in him.
lord how are they increased that trouble me many are they
that rise up against me.
many there be which say of my soul there is no help for him
in God. Selah.
but thou O lord art a shield for me my glory and the
lifter up of mine head.
I cried unto the lord with my voice and he heard me out of
his holy hill. Selah.
I laid me down and slept I awaked for the lord sustained me.
I will not be afraid of Ten thousands of people that have set
themselves against me round about.
Arise O lord save me O my God for thou hast smitten all
mine enemies upon the cheek bone thou hast broken the teeth
of the ungodly.
salvation belongeth unto the lord thy blessing is upon thy
people. Selah.
hear me when I call O God of my righteousness thou hast
enlarged me when I was in distress have mercy upon me and
hear my prayer.
O ye sons of men how long will ye turn my glory into shame?
how long will ye love vanity and seek after leasing? Selah.
but know that the lord hath set apart him that is godly for
himself the lord will hear when I call unto him.
stand in awe and Sin not commune with your own heart upon
your bed and be still. Selah.
offer the sacrifices of righteousness and put your trust in
the lord.
there be many that say who will shew us any good? lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.
thou hast put gladness in my heart more than in the time that
their corn and their wine increased.
I will both lay me down in peace and sleep for thou lord
only makest me dwell in safety.
give ear to my words O lord consider my meditation.
hearken unto the voice of my cry my king and my God for
unto thee will I pray.
my voice shalt thou hear in the morning O lord in the
morning will I direct my prayer unto thee and will look up.
for thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness
Neither shall evil dwell with thee.
the foolish shall not stand in thy sight thou hatest all
workers of iniquity.
thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing the lord will
abhor the bloody and deceitful man.
but as for me I will come into thy house in the multitude of
thy mercy and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy
temple.
lead me O lord in thy righteousness because of mine enemies
make thy way straight before my face.
for there is no faithfulness in their mouth their inward part
is very wickedness their throat is an open sepulchre they
flatter with their tongue.
destroy thou them O God let them fall by their own counsels
cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions for
they have rebelled against thee.
but let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice let
them ever shout for joy because thou defendest them let them
also that love thy name be joyful in thee.
for thou lord wilt bless the righteous with favour wilt
thou compass him as with a shield.
O lord rebuke me not in thine anger Neither chasten me in
thy hot displeasure.
have mercy upon me O lord for I Am weak O lord heal me
for my bones are vexed.
my soul is also sore vexed but thou O lord how long?
return O lord deliver my soul oh save me for thy mercies
sake.
for in death there is no remembrance of thee in the grave who
shall give thee thanks?
I Am weary with my groaning all the night make I my bed to
swim I water my couch with my tears.
mine eye is consumed because of grief it waxeth old because
of all mine enemies.
depart from me all ye workers of iniquity for the lord hath
heard the voice of my weeping.
the lord hath heard my supplication the lord will receive my
prayer.
let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed let them
return and be ashamed suddenly.
O lord my God in thee do I put my trust save me from all
them that persecute me and deliver me
lest he tear my soul like a lion rending it in pieces while
there is none to deliver.
O lord my God if I have done this if there be iniquity in my
hands
if I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me
 yea I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy
let the enemy persecute my soul and take it yea let him
tread down my life upon the earth and lay mine honour in the
dust. Selah.
Arise O lord in thine anger lift up thyself because of the
rage of mine enemies and awake for me to the judgment that
thou hast commanded.
so shall the congregation of the people compass thee about
for their sakes therefore return thou on high.
the lord shall judge the people judge me O lord according
to my righteousness and according to mine integrity that is
in me.
oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end but
establish the just for the righteous God trieth the hearts
and reins.
my defence is of God which saveth the upright in heart.
God judgeth the righteous and God is angry with the wicked
every day.
if he turn not he will whet his sword he hath bent his bow
and made it ready.
he hath also prepared for him the instruments of death he
ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors.
behold he travaileth with iniquity and hath conceived
mischief and brought forth falsehood.
he made a pit and digged it and is fallen into the ditch
which he made.
his mischief shall return upon his own head and his violent
dealing shall come down upon his own pate.
I will praise the lord according to his righteousness and
will sing praise to the name of the lord most high.
O lord our lord how excellent is thy name in all the earth
who hast set thy glory above the heavens.
out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained
strength because of thine enemies that thou mightest still
the enemy and the avenger.
when I consider thy heavens the work of thy fingers the moon
and the stars which thou hast ordained
what is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man
that thou visitest him?
for thou hast made him a little lower than the angels and
hast crowned him with glory and honour.
thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands
thou hast put all things under his feet
all sheep and oxen yea and the beasts of the field
the fowl of the air and the fish of the sea and whatsoever
passeth through the paths of the seas.
O lord our lord how excellent is thy name in all the earth
I will praise thee O lord with my whole heart I will shew
forth all thy marvellous works.
I will be glad and rejoice in thee I will sing praise to thy
name O thou most high.
when mine enemies are turned back they shall fall and perish
at thy presence.
for thou hast maintained my right and my cause thou satest in
the throne judging right.
thou hast rebuked the heathen thou hast destroyed the wicked
thou hast put out their name for ever and ever.
O thou enemy destructions are come to a perpetual end and
thou hast destroyed cities their memorial is perished with
them.
but the lord shall endure for ever he hath prepared his
throne for judgment.
and he shall judge the world in righteousness he shall
minister judgment to the people in uprightness.
the lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed a refuge in
times of trouble.
and they that know thy name will put their trust in thee for
thou lord hast not forsaken them that seek thee.
sing praises to the lord which dwelleth in Zion declare
among the people his doings.
when he maketh inquisition for blood he remembereth them he
forgetteth not the cry of the humble.
have mercy upon me O lord consider my trouble which I suffer
of them that hate me thou that liftest me up from the gates
of death
that I may shew forth all thy praise in the gates of the
daughter of Zion I will rejoice in thy salvation.
the heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made in the
net which they hid is their own foot taken.
the lord is known by the judgment which he executeth the
wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion.
Selah.
the wicked shall be turned into hell and all the nations that
forget God.
for the needy shall not alway be forgotten the expectation of
the poor shall not perish for ever.
Arise O lord let not man prevail let the heathen be judged
in thy sight.
put them in fear O lord that the nations may know themselves
to be but men. Selah.
why standest thou afar off O lord? why hidest thou thyself in
times of trouble?
the wicked in his pride doth persecute the poor let them be
taken in the devices that they have imagined.
for the wicked boasteth of his heart s desire and blesseth
the covetous whom the lord abhorreth.
the wicked through the pride of his countenance will not
seek after God God is not in all his thoughts.
his ways are always grievous thy judgments are far above out
of his sight as for all his enemies he puffeth at them.
he hath said in his heart I shall not be moved for I shall
never be in adversity.
his mouth is full of cursing and deceit and fraud under his
tongue is mischief and vanity.
he sitteth in the lurking places of the villages in the
secret places doth he murder the innocent his eyes are
privily set against the poor.
he lieth in wait secretly as a lion in his den he lieth in
wait to catch the poor he doth catch the poor when he
draweth him into his net.
he croucheth and humbleth himself that the poor may fall by
his strong ones.
he hath said in his heart God hath forgotten he hideth his
face he will never see it.
Arise O lord O God lift up thine hand forget not the
humble.
wherefore doth the wicked contemn God? he hath said in his
heart thou wilt not require it.
thou hast seen it for thou beholdest mischief and spite to
requite it with thy hand the poor committeth himself unto
thee thou art the helper of the fatherless.
break thou the arm of the wicked and the evil man seek out
his wickedness till thou find none.
the lord is king for ever and ever the heathen are perished
out of his land.
lord thou hast heard the desire of the humble thou wilt
prepare their heart thou wilt cause thine ear to hear
to judge the fatherless and the oppressed that the man of the
earth may no more oppress.
in the lord put I my trust how say ye to my soul flee as a
bird to your mountain?
for lo the wicked bend their bow they make ready their
arrow upon the string that they may privily shoot at the
upright in heart.
if the foundations be destroyed what can the righteous do?
the lord is in his holy temple the lord s throne is in
heaven his eyes behold his eyelids try the children of men.
the lord trieth the righteous but the wicked and him that
loveth violence his soul hateth.
upon the wicked he shall rain snares fire and brimstone and
an horrible tempest this shall be the portion of their cup.
for the righteous lord loveth righteousness his countenance
doth behold the upright.
help lord for the godly man ceaseth for the faithful fail
from among the children of men.
they speak vanity every one with his neighbour with
flattering lips and with a double heart do they speak.
the lord shall cut off all flattering lips and the tongue
that speaketh proud things
who have said with our tongue will we prevail our lips are
our own who is lord over us?
for the oppression of the poor for the sighing of the needy
now will I Arise saith the lord I will set him in safety
from him that puffeth at him.
the words of the lord are pure words as Silver tried in a
furnace of earth purified seven times.
thou shalt keep them O lord thou shalt preserve them from
this generation for ever.
the wicked walk on every side when the vilest men are
exalted.
how long wilt thou forget me O lord? for ever? how long wilt
thou hide thy face from me?
how long shall I take counsel in my soul having sorrow in my
heart daily? how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?
consider and hear me O lord my God lighten mine eyes lest I
sleep the sleep of death
lest mine enemy say I have prevailed against him and those
that trouble me rejoice when I Am moved.
but I have trusted in thy mercy my heart shall rejoice in thy
salvation.
I will sing unto the lord because he hath dealt bountifully
with me.
the fool hath said in his heart there is no God. they are
corrupt they have done abominable works there is none that
doeth good.
the lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men to
see if there were any that did understand and seek God.
they are all gone aside they are all together become filthy
there is none that doeth good no not one.
have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my
people as they eat bread and call not upon the lord.
there were they in great fear for God is in the generation of
the righteous.
ye have Shamed the counsel of the poor because the lord is
his refuge.
oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion when
the lord bringeth back the captivity of his people Jacob
shall rejoice and Israel shall be glad.
lord who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in
thy holy hill?
he that walketh uprightly and worketh righteousness and
speaketh the truth in his heart.
he that backbiteth not with his tongue nor doeth evil to his
neighbour nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.
in whose eyes a vile person is contemned but he honoureth
them that fear the lord. he that sweareth to his own hurt and
changeth not.
he that putteth not out his money to usury nor taketh reward
against the innocent. he that doeth these things shall never
be moved.
preserve me O God for in thee do I put my trust.
O my soul thou hast said unto the lord thou art my lord my
goodness extendeth not to thee
but to the saints that are in the earth and to the excellent
in whom is all my delight.
their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another
God their drink offerings of blood will I not offer nor take
up their names into my lips.
the lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup
thou maintainest my Lot.
the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places yea I have a
goodly heritage.
I will bless the lord who hath given me counsel my reins
also instruct me in the night seasons.
I have set the lord always before me because he is at my
right hand I shall not be moved.
therefore my heart is glad and my glory rejoiceth my flesh
also shall rest in hope.
for thou wilt not leave my soul in hell Neither wilt thou
suffer thine holy one to see corruption.
thou wilt shew me the path of life in thy presence is fulness
of joy at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
hear the right O lord attend unto my cry give ear unto my
prayer that goeth not out of feigned lips.
let my sentence come forth from thy presence let thine eyes
behold the things that are equal.
thou hast proved mine heart thou hast visited me in the
night thou hast tried me and shalt find nothing I Am
purposed that my mouth shall not transgress.
concerning the works of men by the word of thy lips I have
kept me from the paths of the destroyer.
hold up my goings in thy paths that my footsteps slip not.
I have called upon thee for thou wilt hear me O God incline
thine ear unto me and hear my speech.
shew thy marvellous lovingkindness O thou that savest by thy
right hand them which put their trust in thee from those that
rise up against them.
keep me as the apple of the eye hide me under the shadow of
thy wings
from the wicked that oppress me from my deadly enemies who
compass me about.
they are inclosed in their own fat with their mouth they
speak proudly.
they have now compassed us in our steps they have set their
eyes bowing down to the earth
like as a lion that is greedy of his prey and as it were a
young lion lurking in secret places.
Arise O lord disappoint him cast him down deliver my soul
from the wicked which is thy sword
from men which are thy hand O lord from men of the world
which have their portion in this life and whose belly thou
fillest with thy hid treasure they are full of children and
leave the rest of their substance to their babes.
as for me I will behold thy face in righteousness I shall be
satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.
I will love thee O lord my strength.
the lord is my rock and my fortress and my deliverer my
God my strength in whom I will trust my buckler and the
horn of my salvation and my high tower.
I will call upon the lord who is worthy to be praised so
shall I be saved from mine enemies.
the sorrows of death compassed me and the floods of ungodly
men made me afraid.
the sorrows of hell compassed me about the snares of death
prevented me.
in my distress I called upon the lord and cried unto my God
he heard my voice out of his temple and my cry came before
him even into his ears.
then the earth shook and trembled the foundations also of the
hills moved and were shaken because he was wroth.
there went up a smoke out of his nostrils and fire out of his
mouth devoured coals were kindled by it.
he bowed the heavens also and came down and darkness was
under his feet.
and he rode upon a Cherub and did fly yea he did fly upon
the wings of the wind.
he made darkness his secret place his pavilion round about
him were dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.
at the brightness that was before him his thick clouds passed
hail stones and coals of fire.
the lord also thundered in the heavens and the highest gave
his voice hail stones and coals of fire.
yea he sent out his arrows and scattered them and he shot
out lightnings and discomfited them.
then the channels of waters were seen and the foundations of
the world were discovered at thy rebuke O lord at the blast
of the breath of thy nostrils.
he sent from above he took me he drew me out of many waters.
he delivered me from my strong enemy and from them which
hated me for they were too strong for me.
they prevented me in the day of my calamity but the lord was
my stay.
he brought me forth also into a large place he delivered me
because he delighted in me.
the lord rewarded me according to my righteousness according
to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.
for I have kept the ways of the lord and have not wickedly
departed from my God.
for all his judgments were before me and I did not put away
his statutes from me.
I was also upright before him and I kept myself from mine
iniquity.
therefore hath the lord recompensed me according to my
righteousness according to the cleanness of my hands in his
eyesight.
with the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful with an
upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright
with the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure and with the
froward thou wilt shew thyself froward.
for thou wilt save the afflicted people but wilt bring down
high looks.
for thou wilt light my candle the lord my God will enlighten
my darkness.
for by thee I have run through a troop and by my God have I
leaped over a wall.
as for God his way is perfect the word of the lord is tried
he is a buckler to all those that trust in him.
for who is God save the lord? or who is a rock save our God?
it is God that girdeth me with strength and maketh my way
perfect.
he maketh my feet like hinds feet and setteth me upon my
high places.
he teacheth my hands to war so that a bow of steel is broken
by mine arms.
thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation and thy
right hand hath holden me up and thy gentleness hath made me
great.
thou hast enlarged my steps under me that my feet did not
slip.
I have pursued mine enemies and overtaken them Neither did I
turn again till they were consumed.
I have wounded them that they were not able to rise they are
fallen under my feet.
for thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle thou
hast subdued under me those that rose up against me.
thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies that I
might destroy them that hate me.
they cried but there was none to save them even unto the
lord but he answered them not.
then did I beat them small as the dust before the wind I did
cast them out as the dirt in the streets.
thou hast delivered me from the strivings of the people and
thou hast made me the head of the heathen a people whom I
have not known shall serve me.
as soon as they hear of me they shall obey me the strangers
shall submit themselves unto me.
the strangers shall fade away and be afraid out of their
close places.
the lord liveth and blessed be my rock and let the God of my
salvation be exalted.
it is God that avengeth me and subdueth the people under me.
he delivereth me from mine enemies yea thou liftest me up
above those that rise up against me thou hast delivered me
from the violent man.
therefore will I give thanks unto thee O lord among the
heathen and sing praises unto thy name.
great deliverance giveth he to his king and sheweth mercy to
his anointed to David and to his seed for evermore.
the heavens declare the glory of God and the firmament
sheweth his handywork.
day unto day uttereth speech and night unto night sheweth
knowledge.
there is no speech nor language where their voice is not
heard.
their line is gone out through all the earth and their words
to the end of the world. in them hath he set a tabernacle for
the sun
which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber and
rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race.
his going forth is from the end of the heaven and his circuit
unto the ends of it and there is nothing hid from the heat
thereof.
the law of the lord is perfect converting the soul the
testimony of the lord is sure making wise the simple.
the statutes of the lord are right rejoicing the heart the
commandment of the lord is pure enlightening the eyes.
the fear of the lord is clean enduring for ever the
judgments of the lord are true and righteous altogether.
more to be desired are they than gold yea than Much fine
gold sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.
moreover by them is thy servant warned and in keeping of them
there is great reward.
who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret
faults.
keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins let them
not have dominion over me then shall I be upright and I
shall be innocent from the great transgression.
let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be
acceptable in thy sight O lord my strength and my redeemer.
the lord hear thee in the day of trouble the name of the God
of Jacob defend thee
send thee help from the sanctuary and strengthen thee out of
Zion
remember all thy offerings and accept thy burnt sacrifice
Selah.
grant thee according to thine own heart and fulfil all thy
counsel.
we will rejoice in thy salvation and in the name of our God
we will set up our banners the lord fulfil all thy petitions.
now know I that the lord saveth his anointed he will hear him
from his holy heaven with the saving strength of his right
hand.
some trust in chariots and some in horses but we will
remember the name of the lord our God.
they are brought down and fallen but we are risen and stand
upright.
save lord let the king hear us when we call.
the king shall joy in thy strength O lord and in thy
salvation how greatly shall he rejoice
thou hast given him his heart s desire and hast not
withholden the request of his lips. Selah.
for thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness thou
settest a crown of pure gold on his head.
he asked life of thee and thou Gavest it him even length of
days for ever and ever.
his glory is great in thy salvation honour and majesty hast
thou laid upon him.
for thou hast made him most blessed for ever thou hast made
him exceeding glad with thy countenance.
for the king trusteth in the lord and through the mercy of
the most high he shall not be moved.
thine hand shall find out all thine enemies thy right hand
shall find out those that hate thee.
thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine
anger the lord shall swallow them up in his wrath and the
fire shall devour them.
their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth and their seed
from among the children of men.
for they intended evil against thee they imagined a
mischievous device which they are not able to perform.
therefore shalt thou make them turn their back when thou
shalt make ready thine arrows upon thy strings against the
face of them.
be thou exalted lord in thine own strength so will we sing
and praise thy power.
my God my God why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou so far
from helping me and from the words of my roaring?
O my God I cry in the day time but thou hearest not and in
the night season and Am not silent.
but thou art holy O thou that inhabitest the praises of
Israel.
our fathers trusted in thee they trusted and thou didst
deliver them.
they cried unto thee and were delivered they trusted in
thee and were not confounded.
but I Am a worm and no man a reproach of men and despised
of the people.
all they that see me laugh me to scorn they shoot out the
lip they shake the head saying
he trusted on the lord that he would deliver him let him
deliver him seeing he delighted in him.
but thou art he that took me out of the womb thou didst make
me hope when I was upon my mother s breasts.
I was cast upon thee from the womb thou art my God from my
mother s belly.
be not far from me for trouble is near for there is none to
help.
many bulls have compassed me strong bulls of Bashan have
beset me round.
they gaped upon me with their mouths as a ravening and a
roaring lion.
I Am poured out like water and all my bones are out of joint
my heart is like wax it is melted in the midst of my bowels.
my strength is dried up like a potsherd and my tongue
cleaveth to my jaws and thou hast brought me into the dust of
death.
for dogs have compassed me the assembly of the wicked have
inclosed me they pierced my hands and my feet.
I may tell all my bones they look and stare upon me.
they part my garments among them and cast lots upon my
vesture.
but be not thou far from me O lord O my strength haste thee
to help me.
deliver my soul from the sword my darling from the power of
the dog.
save me from the lion s mouth for thou hast heard me from the
horns of the unicorns.
I will declare thy name unto my brethren in the midst of the
congregation will I praise thee.
ye that fear the lord praise him all ye the seed of Jacob
glorify him and fear him all ye the seed of Israel.
for he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the
afflicted Neither hath he hid his face from him but when he
cried unto him he heard.
my praise shall be of thee in the great congregation I will
pay my vows before them that fear him.
the meek shall eat and be satisfied they shall praise the
lord that seek him your heart shall live for ever.
all the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the
lord and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before
thee.
for the kingdom is the lord s and he is the Governor among
the nations.
all they that be fat upon earth shall eat and worship all
they that go down to the dust shall bow before him and none
can keep alive his own soul.
a seed shall serve him it shall be accounted to the lord for
a generation.
they shall come and shall declare his righteousness unto a
people that shall be born that he hath done this.
the lord is my Shepherd I shall not want.
he maketh me to lie down in green pastures he leadeth me
beside the still waters.
he restoreth my soul he leadeth me in the paths of
righteousness for his name s sake.
yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death
I will fear no evil for thou art with me thy rod and thy
staff they comfort me.
thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine
enemies thou anointest my head with oil my cup runneth over.
surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life and I will dwell in the house of the lord for ever.
the earth is the lord s and the fulness thereof the world
and they that dwell therein.
for he hath founded it upon the seas and established it upon
the floods.
who shall ascend into the hill of the lord? or who shall stand
in his holy place?
he that hath clean hands and a pure heart who hath not
lifted up his soul unto vanity nor sworn deceitfully.
he shall receive the blessing from the lord and righteousness
from the God of his salvation.
this is the generation of them that seek him that seek thy
face O Jacob. Selah.
lift up your heads O ye gates and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors and the king of glory shall come in.
who is this king of glory? the lord strong and Mighty the
lord Mighty in battle.
lift up your heads O ye gates even lift them up ye
everlasting doors and the king of glory shall come in.
who is this king of glory? the lord of hosts he is the king
of glory. Selah.
unto thee O lord do I lift up my soul.
O my God I trust in thee let me not be ashamed let not mine
enemies triumph over me.
yea let none that wait on thee be ashamed let them be
ashamed which transgress without cause.
shew me thy ways O lord teach me thy paths.
lead me in thy truth and teach me for thou art the God of my
salvation on thee do I wait all the day.
remember O lord thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses
for they have been ever of old.
remember not the sins of my youth nor my transgressions
according to thy mercy remember thou me for thy goodness
sake O lord.
good and upright is the lord therefore will he teach sinners
in the way.
the meek will he guide in judgment and the meek will he teach
his way.
all the paths of the lord are mercy and truth unto such as
keep his covenant and his testimonies.
for thy name s sake O lord pardon mine iniquity for it is
great.
what man is he that feareth the lord? him shall he teach in
the way that he shall choose.
his soul shall dwell at ease and his seed shall inherit the
earth.
the secret of the lord is with them that fear him and he will
shew them his covenant.
mine eyes are ever toward the lord for he shall pluck my feet
out of the net.
turn thee unto me and have mercy upon me for I Am desolate
and afflicted.
the troubles of my heart are enlarged O bring thou me out of
my distresses.
look upon mine affliction and my pain and forgive all my
sins.
consider mine enemies for they are many and they hate me
with cruel hatred.
O keep my soul and deliver me let me not be ashamed for I
put my trust in thee.
let integrity and uprightness preserve me for I wait on thee.
redeem Israel O God out of all his troubles.
judge me O lord for I have walked in mine integrity I have
trusted also in the lord therefore I shall not slide.
examine me O lord and prove me try my reins and my heart.
for thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes and I have walked
in thy truth.
I have not sat with vain persons Neither will I go in with
dissemblers.
I have hated the congregation of evil doers and will not sit
with the wicked.
I will wash mine hands in innocency so will I compass thine
altar O lord
that I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving and tell of
all thy wondrous works.
lord I have loved the habitation of thy house and the place
where thine honour dwelleth.
gather not my soul with sinners nor my life with bloody men
in whose hands is mischief and their right hand is full of
bribes.
but as for me I will walk in mine integrity redeem me and
be merciful unto me.
my foot standeth in an even place in the congregations will I
bless the lord.
the lord is my light and my salvation whom shall I fear? the
lord is the strength of my life of whom shall I be afraid?
when the wicked even mine enemies and my foes came upon me
to eat up my flesh they stumbled and fell.
though an host should encamp against me my heart shall not
fear though war should rise against me in this will I be
confident.
one thing have I desired of the lord that will I seek after
that I may dwell in the house of the lord all the days of my
life to behold the beauty of the lord and to enquire in his
temple.
for in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion
in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me he shall set
me up upon a rock.
and now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round
about me therefore will I offer in his tabernacle sacrifices
of joy I will sing yea I will sing praises unto the lord.
hear O lord when I cry with my voice have mercy also upon
me and answer me.
when thou saidst seek ye my face my heart said unto thee
thy face lord will I seek.
hide not thy face far from me put not thy servant away in
anger thou hast been my help leave me not Neither forsake
me O God of my salvation.
when my father and my mother forsake me then the lord will
take me up.
teach me thy way O lord and lead me in a plain path because
of mine enemies.
deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies for false
witnesses are risen up against me and such as breathe out
cruelty.
I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of
the lord in the land of the living.
wait on the lord be of good courage and he shall strengthen
thine heart wait I say on the lord.
unto thee will I cry O lord my rock be not silent to me
lest if thou be silent to me I become like them that go down
into the pit.
hear the voice of my supplications when I cry unto thee when
I lift up my hands toward thy holy oracle.
draw me not away with the wicked and with the workers of
iniquity which speak peace to their neighbours but mischief
is in their hearts.
give them according to their deeds and according to the
wickedness of their endeavours give them after the work of
their hands render to them their desert.
because they regard not the works of the lord nor the
operation of his hands he shall destroy them and not build
them up.
blessed be the lord because he hath heard the voice of my
supplications.
the lord is my strength and my shield my heart trusted in
him and I Am helped therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth
and with my song will I praise him.
the lord is their strength and he is the saving strength of
his anointed.
save thy people and bless thine inheritance feed them also
and lift them up for ever.
give unto the lord O ye Mighty give unto the lord glory and
strength.
give unto the lord the glory due unto his name worship the
lord in the beauty of holiness.
the voice of the lord is upon the waters the God of glory
thundereth the lord is upon many waters.
the voice of the lord is powerful the voice of the lord is
full of majesty.
the voice of the lord breaketh the cedars yea the lord
breaketh the cedars of Lebanon.
he maketh them also to skip like a calf Lebanon and Sirion
like a young unicorn.
the voice of the lord divideth the flames of fire.
the voice of the lord shaketh the wilderness the lord shaketh
the wilderness of Kadesh.
the voice of the lord maketh the hinds to calve and
discovereth the forests and in his temple doth every one
speak of his glory.
the lord sitteth upon the flood yea the lord sitteth king
for ever.
the lord will give strength unto his people the lord will
bless his people with peace.
I will extol thee O lord for thou hast lifted me up and
hast not made my foes to rejoice over me.
O lord my God I cried unto thee and thou hast healed me.
O lord thou hast brought up my soul from the grave thou hast
kept me alive that I should not go down to the pit.
sing unto the lord O ye saints of his and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness.
for his anger endureth but a moment in his favour is life
weeping may endure for a night but joy cometh in the morning.
and in my prosperity I said I shall never be moved.
lord by thy favour thou hast made my mountain to stand
strong thou didst hide thy face and I was troubled.
I cried to thee O lord and unto the lord I made
supplication.
what profit is there in my blood when I go down to the pit?
shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?
hear O lord and have mercy upon me lord be thou my helper.
thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing thou hast
put off my sackcloth and girded me with gladness
to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee and not be
silent. O lord my God I will give thanks unto thee for ever.
in thee O lord do I put my trust let me never be ashamed
deliver me in thy righteousness.
bow down thine ear to me deliver me speedily be thou my
strong rock for an house of defence to save me.
for thou art my rock and my fortress therefore for thy name s
sake lead me and guide me.
pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me for
thou art my strength.
into thine hand I commit my spirit thou hast redeemed me O
lord God of truth.
I have hated them that regard lying vanities but I trust in
the lord.
I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy for thou hast
considered my trouble thou hast known my soul in adversities
and hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy thou hast
set my feet in a large room.
have mercy upon me O lord for I Am in trouble mine eye is
consumed with grief yea my soul and my belly.
for my life is spent with grief and my years with sighing my
strength faileth because of mine iniquity and my bones are
consumed.
I was a reproach among all mine enemies but especially among
my neighbours and a fear to mine acquaintance they that did
see me without fled from me.
I Am forgotten as a dead man out of mind I Am like a broken
vessel.
for I have heard the slander of many fear was on every side
while they took counsel together against me they devised to
take away my life.
but I trusted in thee O lord I said thou art my God.
my times are in thy hand deliver me from the hand of mine
enemies and from them that persecute me.
make thy face to shine upon thy servant save me for thy
mercies sake.
let me not be ashamed O lord for I have called upon thee
let the wicked be ashamed and let them be silent in the
grave.
let the lying lips be put to silence which speak grievous
things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous.
oh how great is thy goodness which thou hast laid up for them
that fear thee which thou hast wrought for them that trust in
thee before the sons of men
thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the
pride of man thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion from
the strife of tongues.
blessed be the lord for he hath shewed me his marvellous
kindness in a strong city.
for I said in my haste I Am cut off from before thine eyes
nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications when
I cried unto thee.
O love the lord all ye his saints for the lord preserveth
the faithful and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer.
be of good courage and he shall strengthen your heart all ye
that hope in the lord.
blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven whose Sin is
covered.
blessed is the man unto whom the lord imputeth not iniquity
and in whose spirit there is no guile.
when I kept silence my bones waxed old through my roaring all
the day long.
for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me my moisture is
turned into the drought of summer. Selah.
I acknowledge my Sin unto thee and mine iniquity have I not
hid. I said I will confess my transgressions unto the lord
and thou forgavest the iniquity of my Sin. Selah.
for this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a
time when thou mayest be found surely in the floods of great
waters they shall not come nigh unto him.
thou art my hiding place thou shalt preserve me from trouble
thou shalt compass me about with songs of deliverance. Selah.
I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou
shalt go I will guide thee with mine eye.
be ye not as the horse or as the mule which have no
understanding whose mouth must be held in with bit and
bridle lest they come near unto thee.
many sorrows shall be to the wicked but he that trusteth in
the lord mercy shall compass him about.
be glad in the lord and rejoice ye righteous and shout for
joy all ye that are upright in heart.
rejoice in the lord O ye righteous for praise is comely for
the upright.
praise the lord with harp sing unto him with the psaltery and
an instrument of Ten strings.
sing unto him a new song play skilfully with a loud noise.
for the word of the lord is right and all his works are done
in truth.
he loveth righteousness and judgment the earth is full of the
goodness of the lord.
by the word of the lord were the heavens made and all the
host of them by the breath of his mouth.
he gathereth the waters of the sea together as an heap he
layeth up the depth in storehouses.
let all the earth fear the lord let all the inhabitants of
the world stand in awe of him.
for he spake and it was done he commanded and it stood
fast.
the lord bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought he
maketh the devices of the people of none effect.
the counsel of the lord standeth for ever the thoughts of his
heart to all generations.
blessed is the nation whose God is the lord and the people
whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance.
the lord looketh from heaven he beholdeth all the sons of
men.
from the place of his habitation he looketh upon all the
inhabitants of the earth.
he fashioneth their hearts alike he considereth all their
works.
there is no king saved by the multitude of an host a Mighty
man is not delivered by Much strength.
an horse is a vain thing for safety Neither shall he deliver
any by his great strength.
behold the eye of the lord is upon them that fear him upon
them that hope in his mercy
to deliver their soul from death and to keep them alive in
famine.
our soul waiteth for the lord he is our help and our shield.
for our heart shall rejoice in him because we have trusted in
his holy name.
let thy mercy O lord be upon us according as we hope in
thee.
I will bless the lord at all times his praise shall
continually be in my mouth.
my soul shall make her boast in the lord the humble shall
hear thereof and be glad.
O magnify the lord with me and let us exalt his name
together.
I sought the lord and he heard me and delivered me from all
my fears.
they looked unto him and were lightened and their faces were
not ashamed.
this poor man cried and the lord heard him and saved him out
of all his troubles.
the angel of the lord encampeth round about them that fear
him and delivereth them.
O taste and see that the lord is good blessed is the man that
trusteth in him.
O fear the lord ye his saints for there is no want to them
that fear him.
the young lions do lack and suffer hunger but they that seek
the lord shall not want any good thing.
come ye children hearken unto me I will teach you the fear
of the lord.
what man is he that desireth life and loveth many days that
he may see good?
keep thy tongue from evil and thy lips from speaking guile.
depart from evil and do good seek peace and pursue it.
the eyes of the lord are upon the righteous and his ears are
open unto their cry.
the face of the lord is against them that do evil to cut off
the remembrance of them from the earth.
the righteous cry and the lord heareth and delivereth them
out of all their troubles.
the lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart and
saveth such as be of a contrite spirit.
many are the afflictions of the righteous but the lord
delivereth him out of them all.
he keepeth all his bones not one of them is broken.
evil shall slay the wicked and they that hate the righteous
shall be desolate.
the lord redeemeth the soul of his servants and none of them
that trust in him shall be desolate.
plead my cause O lord with them that strive with me fight
against them that fight against me.
take hold of shield and buckler and stand up for mine help.
draw out also the spear and stop the way against them that
persecute me say unto my soul I Am thy salvation.
let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my
soul let them be turned back and brought to confusion that
devise my hurt.
let them be as chaff before the wind and let the angel of the
lord chase them.
let their way be dark and slippery and let the angel of the
lord persecute them.
for without cause have they hid for me their net in a pit
which without cause they have digged for my soul.
let destruction come upon him at unawares and let his net
that he hath hid catch himself into that very destruction let
him fall.
and my soul shall be joyful in the lord it shall rejoice in
his salvation.
all my bones shall say lord who is like unto thee which
deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him yea
the poor and the needy from him that spoileth him?
false witnesses did rise up they laid to my charge things
that I knew not.
they rewarded me evil for good to the spoiling of my soul.
but as for me when they were sick my clothing was sackcloth
I humbled my soul with fasting and my prayer returned into
mine own bosom.
I behaved myself as though he had been my friend or brother I
bowed down heavily as one that mourneth for his mother.
but in mine adversity they rejoiced and gathered themselves
together yea the abjects gathered themselves together
against me and I knew it not they did tear me and ceased
not
with hypocritical mockers in feasts they gnashed upon me with
their teeth.
lord how long wilt thou look on? rescue my soul from their
destructions my darling from the lions.
I will give thee thanks in the great congregation I will
praise thee among Much people.
let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me
Neither let them wink with the eye that hate me without a
cause.
for they speak not peace but they devise deceitful matters
against them that are quiet in the land.
yea they opened their mouth wide against me and said aha
aha our eye hath seen it.
this thou hast seen O lord keep not silence O lord be not
far from me.
stir up thyself and awake to my judgment even unto my cause
my God and my lord.
judge me O lord my God according to thy righteousness and
let them not rejoice over me.
let them not say in their hearts ah so would we have it let
them not say we have swallowed him up.
let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that
rejoice at mine hurt let them be clothed with shame and
dishonour that magnify themselves against me.
let them shout for joy and be glad that favour my righteous
cause yea let them say continually let the lord be
magnified which hath pleasure in the prosperity of his
servant.
and my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness and of thy
praise all the day long.
the transgression of the wicked saith within my heart that
there is no fear of God before his eyes.
for he flattereth himself in his own eyes until his iniquity
be found to be hateful.
the words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit he hath left
off to be wise and to do good.
he deviseth mischief upon his bed he setteth himself in a way
that is not good he abhorreth not evil.
thy mercy O lord is in the heavens and thy faithfulness
reacheth unto the clouds.
thy righteousness is like the great mountains thy judgments
are a great deep O lord thou preservest man and beast.
how excellent is thy lovingkindness O God therefore the
children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.
they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy
house and thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy
pleasures.
for with thee is the fountain of life in thy light shall we
see light.
O continue thy lovingkindness unto them that know thee and
thy righteousness to the upright in heart.
let not the foot of pride come against me and let not the
hand of the wicked remove me.
there are the workers of iniquity fallen they are cast down
and shall not be able to rise.
fret not thyself because of evildoers Neither be thou envious
against the workers of iniquity.
for they shall soon be cut down like the grass and wither as
the green herb.
trust in the lord and do good so shalt thou dwell in the
land and verily thou shalt be fed.
delight thyself also in the lord and he shall give thee the
desires of thine heart.
commit thy way unto the lord trust also in him and he shall
bring it to pass.
and he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light and
thy judgment as the noonday.
rest in the lord and wait patiently for him fret not thyself
because of him who prospereth in his way because of the man
who bringeth wicked devices to pass.
cease from anger and forsake wrath fret not thyself in any
wise to do evil.
for evildoers shall be cut off but those that wait upon the
lord they shall inherit the earth.
for yet a little while and the wicked shall not be yea thou
shalt diligently consider his place and it shall not be.
but the meek shall inherit the earth and shall delight
themselves in the abundance of peace.
the wicked plotteth against the just and gnasheth upon him
with his teeth.
the lord shall laugh at him for he seeth that his day is
coming.
the wicked have drawn out the sword and have bent their bow
to cast down the poor and needy and to slay such as be of
upright conversation.
their sword shall enter into their own heart and their bows
shall be broken.
a little that a righteous man hath is better than the Riches
of many wicked.
for the arms of the wicked shall be broken but the lord
upholdeth the righteous.
the lord knoweth the days of the upright and their
inheritance shall be for ever.
they shall not be ashamed in the evil time and in the days of
famine they shall be satisfied.
but the wicked shall perish and the enemies of the lord shall
be as the fat of lambs they shall consume into smoke shall
they consume away.
the wicked borroweth and payeth not again but the righteous
sheweth mercy and giveth.
for such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth and
they that be cursed of him shall be cut off.
the steps of a good man are ordered by the lord and he
delighteth in his way.
though he fall he shall not be utterly cast down for the
lord upholdeth him with his hand.
I have been young and now Am old yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken nor his seed begging bread.
he is ever merciful and lendeth and his seed is blessed.
depart from evil and do good and dwell for evermore.
for the lord loveth judgment and forsaketh not his saints
they are preserved for ever but the seed of the wicked shall
be cut off.
the righteous shall inherit the land and dwell therein for
ever.
the mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom and his tongue
talketh of judgment.
the law of his God is in his heart none of his steps shall
slide.
the wicked watcheth the righteous and seeketh to slay him.
the lord will not leave him in his hand nor condemn him when
he is judged.
wait on the lord and keep his way and he shall exalt thee to
inherit the land when the wicked are cut off thou shalt see
it.
I have seen the wicked in great power and spreading himself
like a green bay tree.
yet he passed away and lo he was not yea I sought him
but he could not be found.
Mark the perfect man and behold the upright for the end of
that man is peace.
but the transgressors shall be destroyed together the end of
the wicked shall be cut off.
but the salvation of the righteous is of the lord he is their
strength in the time of trouble.
and the lord shall help them and deliver them he shall
deliver them from the wicked and save them because they
trust in him.
O lord rebuke me not in thy wrath Neither chasten me in thy
hot displeasure.
for thine arrows stick fast in me and thy hand presseth me
sore.
there is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger
Neither is there any rest in my bones because of my Sin.
for mine iniquities are gone over mine head as an heavy
burden they are too heavy for me.
my wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness.
I Am troubled I Am bowed down greatly I go mourning all the
day long.
for my loins are filled with a loathsome disease and there is
no soundness in my flesh.
I Am feeble and sore broken I have roared by reason of the
disquietness of my heart.
lord all my desire is before thee and my groaning is not hid
from thee.
my heart panteth my strength faileth me as for the light of
mine eyes it also is gone from me.
my lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore and my
kinsmen stand afar off.
they also that seek after my life lay snares for me and they
that seek my hurt speak mischievous things and imagine
deceits all the day long.
but I as a deaf man heard not and I was as a dumb man that
openeth not his mouth.
thus I was as a man that heareth not and in whose mouth are
no reproofs.
for in thee O lord do I hope thou wilt hear O lord my God.
for I said hear me lest otherwise they should rejoice over
me when my foot slippeth they magnify themselves against me.
for I Am ready to halt and my sorrow is continually before
me.
for I will declare mine iniquity I will be sorry for my Sin.
but mine enemies are lively and they are strong and they
that hate me wrongfully are multiplied.
they also that render evil for good are mine adversaries
because I follow the thing that good is.
forsake me not O lord O my God be not far from me.
make haste to help me O lord my salvation.
I said I will take heed to my ways that I Sin not with my
tongue I will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked
is before me.
I was dumb with silence I held my peace even from good and
my sorrow was stirred.
my heart was hot within me while I was musing the fire
burned then spake I with my tongue
lord make me to know mine end and the measure of my days
what it is that I may know how frail I Am.
behold thou hast made my days as an handbreadth and mine age
is as nothing before thee verily every man at his best state
is altogether vanity. Selah.
surely every man walketh in a vain shew surely they are
disquieted in vain he heapeth up Riches and knoweth not who
shall gather them.
and now lord what wait I for? my hope is in thee.
deliver me from all my transgressions make me not the
reproach of the foolish.
I was dumb I opened not my mouth because thou didst it.
remove thy stroke away from me I Am consumed by the blow of
thine hand.
when thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity thou
makest his beauty to consume away like a moth surely every
man is vanity. Selah.
hear my prayer O lord and give ear unto my cry hold not thy
peace at my tears for I Am a stranger with thee and a
sojourner as all my fathers were.
O spare me that I may recover strength before I go hence
and be no more.
I waited patiently for the lord and he inclined unto me and
heard my cry.
he brought me up also out of an horrible pit out of the miry
clay and set my feet upon a rock and established my goings.
and he hath put a new song in my mouth even praise unto our
God many shall see it and fear and shall trust in the lord.
blessed is that man that maketh the lord his trust and
respecteth not the proud nor such as turn aside to lies.
many O lord my God are thy wonderful works which thou hast
done and thy thoughts which are to us-ward they cannot be
reckoned up in order unto thee if I would declare and speak
of them they are more than can be numbered.
sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire mine ears hast
thou opened burnt offering and Sin offering hast thou not
required.
then said I lo I come in the volume of the book it is
written of me
I delight to do thy will O my God yea thy law is within my
heart.
I have preached righteousness in the great congregation lo I
have not refrained my lips O lord thou knowest.
I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart I have
declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation I have not
concealed thy lovingkindness and thy truth from the great
congregation.
withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me O lord let thy
lovingkindness and thy truth continually preserve me.
for innumerable evils have compassed me about mine iniquities
have taken hold upon me so that I Am not able to look up
they are more than the hairs of mine head therefore my heart
faileth me.
be pleased O lord to deliver me O lord make haste to help
me.
let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my
soul to destroy it let them be driven backward and put to
shame that wish me evil.
let them be desolate for a reward of their shame that say unto
me aha aha.
let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee let
such as love thy salvation say continually the lord be
magnified.
but I Am poor and needy yet the lord thinketh upon me thou
art my help and my deliverer make no tarrying O my God.
blessed is he that considereth the poor the lord will deliver
him in time of trouble.
the lord will preserve him and keep him alive and he shall
be blessed upon the earth and thou wilt not deliver him unto
the will of his enemies.
the lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing thou
wilt make all his bed in his sickness.
I said lord be merciful unto me heal my soul for I have
sinned against thee.
mine enemies speak evil of me when shall he die and his name
perish?
and if he come to see me he speaketh vanity his heart
gathereth iniquity to itself when he goeth abroad he telleth
it.
all that hate me whisper together against me against me do
they devise my hurt.
an evil disease say they cleaveth fast unto him and now
that he lieth he shall rise up no more.
yea mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted which did
eat of my bread hath lifted up his heel against me.
but thou O lord be merciful unto me and raise me up that I
may requite them.
by this I know that thou favourest me because mine enemy doth
not triumph over me.
and as for me thou upholdest me in mine integrity and
settest me before thy face for ever.
blessed be the lord God of Israel from everlasting and to
everlasting. Amen and Amen.
as the hart panteth after the water brooks so panteth my soul
after thee O God.
my soul thirsteth for God for the living God when shall I
come and appear before God?
my tears have been my meat day and night while they
continually say unto me where is thy God?
when I remember these things I pour out my soul in me for I
had gone with the multitude I went with them to the house of
God with the voice of joy and praise with a multitude that
kept holyday.
why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted
in me? hope thou in God for I shall yet praise him for the
help of his countenance.
O my God my soul is cast down within me therefore will I
remember thee from the land of Jordan and of the Hermonites
from the hill Mizar.
deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts all
thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.
yet the lord will command his lovingkindness in the day time
and in the night his song shall be with me and my prayer unto
the God of my life.
I will say unto God my rock why hast thou forgotten me? why
go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
as with a sword in my bones mine enemies reproach me while
they say daily unto me where is thy God?
why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? hope thou in God for I shall yet praise him who
is the health of my countenance and my God.
judge me O God and plead my cause against an ungodly nation
O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.
for thou art the God of my strength why dost thou cast me
off? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
O send out thy light and thy truth let them lead me let them
bring me unto thy holy hill and to thy tabernacles.
then will I go unto the altar of God unto God my exceeding
joy yea upon the harp will I praise thee O God my God.
why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? hope in God for I shall yet praise him who is the
health of my countenance and my God.
we have heard with our ears O God our fathers have told us
what work thou didst in their days in the times of old.
how thou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand and
plantedst them how thou didst afflict the people and cast
them out.
for they got not the land in possession by their own sword
Neither did their own arm save them but thy right hand and
thine arm and the light of thy countenance because thou
hadst a favour unto them.
thou art my king O God command deliverances for Jacob.
through thee will we push down our enemies through thy name
will we tread them under that rise up against us.
for I will not trust in my bow Neither shall my sword save
me.
but thou hast saved us from our enemies and hast put them to
shame that hated us.
in God we boast all the day long and praise thy name for
ever. Selah.
but thou hast cast off and put us to shame and goest not
forth with our armies.
thou makest us to turn back from the enemy and they which
hate us spoil for themselves.
thou hast given us like sheep appointed for meat and hast
scattered us among the heathen.
thou sellest thy people for nought and dost not increase thy
wealth by their price.
thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours a scorn and a
derision to them that are round about us.
thou makest us a byword among the heathen a shaking of the
head among the people.
my confusion is continually before me and the shame of my
face hath covered me
for the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth by
reason of the enemy and avenger.
all this is come upon us yet have we not forgotten thee
Neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant.
our heart is not turned back Neither have our steps declined
from thy way
though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons and
covered us with the shadow of death.
if we have forgotten the name of our God or stretched out our
hands to a strange God
shall not God search this out? for he knoweth the secrets of
the heart.
yea for thy sake are we killed all the day long we are
counted as sheep for the slaughter.
awake why sleepest thou O lord? Arise cast us not off for
ever.
wherefore hidest thou thy face and forgettest our affliction
and our oppression?
for our soul is bowed down to the dust our belly cleaveth
unto the earth.
Arise for our help and redeem us for thy mercies sake.
my heart is inditing a good matter I speak of the things
which I have made touching the king my tongue is the pen of a
ready writer.
thou art fairer than the children of men grace is poured into
thy lips therefore God hath blessed thee for ever.
gird thy sword upon thy thigh O most Mighty with thy glory
and thy majesty.
and in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth and
meekness and righteousness and thy right hand shall teach
thee terrible things.
thine arrows are Sharp in the heart of the king s enemies
whereby the people fall under thee.
thy throne O God is for ever and ever the sceptre of thy
kingdom is a right sceptre.
thou lovest righteousness and hatest wickedness therefore
God thy God hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness
above thy fellows.
all thy garments smell of myrrh and aloes and cassia out of
the ivory palaces whereby they have made thee glad.
kings daughters were among thy honourable women upon thy
right hand did stand the queen in gold of Ophir.
hearken O daughter and consider and incline thine ear
forget also thine own people and thy father s house
so shall the king greatly desire thy beauty for he is thy
lord and worship thou him.
and the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift even the
rich among the people shall intreat thy favour.
the king s daughter is all glorious within her clothing is of
wrought gold.
she shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework
the virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought
unto thee.
with gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought they shall
enter into the king s palace.
instead of thy fathers shall be thy children whom thou mayest
make princes in all the earth.
I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations
therefore shall the people praise thee for ever and ever.
God is our refuge and strength a very present help in
trouble.
therefore will not we fear though the earth be removed and
though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea
though the waters thereof roar and be troubled though the
mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah.
there is a river the streams whereof shall make glad the city
of God the holy place of the tabernacles of the most high.
God is in the midst of her she shall not be moved God shall
help her and that right early.
the heathen raged the kingdoms were moved he uttered his
voice the earth melted.
the lord of hosts is with us the God of Jacob is our refuge.
Selah.
come behold the works of the lord what desolations he hath
made in the earth.
he maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth he breaketh
the bow and cutteth the spear in sunder he burneth the
chariot in the fire.
be still and know that I Am God I will be exalted among the
heathen I will be exalted in the earth.
the lord of hosts is with us the God of Jacob is our refuge.
Selah.
O clap your hands all ye people shout unto God with the
voice of triumph.
for the lord most high is terrible he is a great king over
all the earth.
he shall subdue the people under us and the nations under our
feet.
he shall choose our inheritance for us the excellency of
Jacob whom he loved. Selah.
God is gone up with a shout the lord with the sound of a
trumpet.
sing praises to God sing praises sing praises unto our king
sing praises.
for God is the king of all the earth sing ye praises with
understanding.
God reigneth over the heathen God sitteth upon the throne of
his holiness.
the princes of the people are gathered together even the
people of the God of Abraham for the shields of the earth
belong unto God he is greatly exalted.
great is the lord and greatly to be praised in the city of
our God in the mountain of his holiness.
beautiful for situation the joy of the whole earth is mount
Zion on the sides of the north the city of the great king.
God is known in her palaces for a refuge.
for lo the kings were assembled they passed by together.
they saw it and so they marvelled they were troubled and
hasted away.
fear took hold upon them there and pain as of a woman in
travail.
thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind.
as we have heard so have we seen in the city of the lord of
hosts in the city of our God God will establish it for ever.
Selah.
we have thought of thy lovingkindness O God in the midst of
thy temple.
according to thy name O God so is thy praise unto the ends
of the earth thy right hand is full of righteousness.
let mount Zion rejoice let the daughters of Judah be glad
because of thy judgments.
walk about Zion and go round about her tell the towers
thereof.
Mark ye well her bulwarks consider her palaces that ye may
tell it to the generation following.
for this God is our God for ever and ever he will be our
guide even unto death.
hear this all ye people give ear all ye inhabitants of the
world
both low and high rich and poor together.
my mouth shall speak of wisdom and the meditation of my heart
shall be of understanding.
I will incline mine ear to a parable I will open my dark
saying upon the harp.
wherefore should I fear in the days of evil when the iniquity
of my heels shall compass me about?
they that trust in their wealth and boast themselves in the
multitude of their Riches
none of them can by any means redeem his brother nor give to
God a ransom for him
 for the redemption of their soul is precious and it ceaseth
for ever
that he should still live for ever and not see corruption.
for he seeth that wise men die likewise the fool and the
brutish person perish and leave their wealth to others.
their inward thought is that their houses shall continue for
ever and their dwelling places to all generations they call
their lands after their own names.
nevertheless man being in honour abideth not he is like the
beasts that perish.
this their way is their folly yet their posterity approve
their sayings. Selah.
like sheep they are laid in the grave death shall feed on
them and the upright shall have dominion over them in the
morning and their beauty shall consume in the grave from
their dwelling.
but God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave for
he shall receive me. Selah.
be not thou afraid when one is made rich when the glory of
his house is increased
for when he dieth he shall carry nothing away his glory shall
not descend after him.
though while he lived he blessed his soul and men will praise
thee when thou doest well to thyself.
he shall go to the generation of his fathers they shall never
see light.
man that is in honour and understandeth not is like the
beasts that perish.
the Mighty God even the lord hath spoken and called the
earth from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof.
out of Zion the perfection of beauty God hath shined.
our God shall come and shall not keep silence a fire shall
devour before him and it shall be very tempestuous round
about him.
he shall call to the heavens from above and to the earth
that he may judge his people.
gather my saints together unto me those that have made a
covenant with me by sacrifice.
and the heavens shall declare his righteousness for God is
judge himself. Selah.
hear O my people and I will speak O Israel and I will
testify against thee I Am God even thy God.
I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt
offerings to have been continually before me.
I will take no bullock out of thy house nor he goats out of
thy folds.
for every beast of the forest is mine and the cattle upon a
thousand hills.
I know all the fowls of the mountains and the wild beasts of
the field are mine.
if I were hungry I would not tell thee for the world is
mine and the fulness thereof.
will I eat the flesh of bulls or drink the blood of goats?
offer unto God thanksgiving and pay thy vows unto the most
high
and call upon me in the day of trouble I will deliver thee
and thou shalt glorify me.
but unto the wicked God saith what hast thou to do to declare
my statutes or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy
mouth?
seeing thou hatest instruction and casteth my words behind
thee.
when thou sawest a thief then thou consentedst with him and
hast been partaker with adulterers.
thou givest thy mouth to evil and thy tongue frameth deceit.
thou sittest and speakest against thy brother thou slanderest
thine own mother s son.
these things hast thou done and I kept silence thou
thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself but I
will reprove thee and set them in order before thine eyes.
now consider this ye that forget God lest I tear you in
pieces and there be none to deliver.
whoso offereth praise glorifieth me and to him that ordereth
his conversation aright will I shew the salvation of God.
have mercy upon me O God according to thy lovingkindness
according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my
transgressions.
wash me throughly from mine iniquity and cleanse me from my
Sin.
for I acknowledge my transgressions and my Sin is ever before
me.
against thee thee only have I sinned and done this evil in
thy sight that thou mightest be justified when thou speakest
and be clear when thou judgest.
behold I was shapen in iniquity and in Sin did my mother
conceive me.
behold thou desirest truth in the inward parts and in the
hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom.
purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean wash me and I
shall be whiter than snow.
make me to hear joy and gladness that the bones which thou
hast broken may rejoice.
hide thy face from my sins and blot out all mine iniquities.
create in me a clean heart O God and renew a right spirit
within me.
cast me not away from thy presence and take not thy holy
spirit from me.
restore unto me the joy of thy salvation and uphold me with
thy free spirit.
then will I teach transgressors thy ways and sinners shall be
converted unto thee.
deliver me from bloodguiltiness O God thou God of my
salvation and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy
righteousness.
O lord open thou my lips and my mouth shall shew forth thy
praise.
for thou desirest not sacrifice else would I give it thou
delightest not in burnt offering.
the sacrifices of God are a broken spirit a broken and a
contrite heart O God thou wilt not despise.
do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion build thou the walls
of Jerusalem.
then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of
righteousness with burnt offering and whole burnt offering
then shall they offer bullocks upon thine altar.
why boastest thou thyself in mischief O Mighty man? the
goodness of God endureth continually.
the tongue deviseth mischiefs like a Sharp razor working
deceitfully.
thou lovest evil more than good and lying rather than to
speak righteousness. Selah.
thou lovest all devouring words O thou deceitful tongue.
God shall likewise destroy thee for ever he shall take thee
away and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place and root thee
out of the land of the living. Selah.
the righteous also shall see and fear and shall laugh at
him
lo this is the man that made not God his strength but
trusted in the abundance of his Riches and strengthened
himself in his wickedness.
but I Am like a green olive tree in the house of God I trust
in the mercy of God for ever and ever.
I will praise thee for ever because thou hast done it and I
will wait on thy name for it is good before thy saints.
the fool hath said in his heart there is no God. corrupt are
they and have done abominable iniquity there is none that
doeth good.
God looked down from heaven upon the children of men to see
if there were any that did understand that did seek God.
every one of them is gone back they are altogether become
filthy there is none that doeth good no not one.
have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my
people as they eat bread they have not called upon God.
there were they in great fear where no fear was for God hath
scattered the bones of him that encampeth against thee thou
hast put them to shame because God hath despised them.
oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion when
God bringeth back the captivity of his people Jacob shall
rejoice and Israel shall be glad.
save me O God by thy name and judge me by thy strength.
hear my prayer O God give ear to the words of my mouth.
for strangers are risen up against me and oppressors seek
after my soul they have not set God before them. Selah.
behold God is mine helper the lord is with them that uphold
my soul.
he shall reward evil unto mine enemies cut them off in thy
truth.
I will freely sacrifice unto thee I will praise thy name O
lord for it is good.
for he hath delivered me out of all trouble and mine eye hath
seen his desire upon mine enemies.
give ear to my prayer O God and hide not thyself from my
supplication.
attend unto me and hear me I mourn in my complaint and make
a noise
because of the voice of the enemy because of the oppression
of the wicked for they cast iniquity upon me and in wrath
they hate me.
my heart is sore pained within me and the terrors of death
are fallen upon me.
fearfulness and trembling are come upon me and horror hath
overwhelmed me.
and I said oh that I had wings like a dove for then would I
fly away and be at rest.
lo then would I wander far off and remain in the wilderness.
Selah.
I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest.
destroy O lord and divide their tongues for I have seen
violence and strife in the city.
day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof
mischief also and sorrow are in the midst of it.
wickedness is in the midst thereof deceit and guile depart
not from her streets.
for it was not an enemy that reproached me then I could have
borne it Neither was it he that hated me that did magnify
himself against me then I would have hid myself from him
but it was thou a man mine equal my guide and mine
acquaintance.
we took sweet counsel together and walked unto the house of
God in company.
let death seize upon them and let them go down quick into
hell for wickedness is in their dwellings and among them.
as for me I will call upon God and the lord shall save me.
evening and morning and at noon will I pray and cry aloud
and he shall hear my voice.
he hath delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was
against me for there were many with me.
God shall hear and afflict them even he that abideth of old.
Selah. because they have no changes therefore they fear not
God.
he hath put forth his hands against such as be at peace with
him he hath broken his covenant.
the words of his mouth were smoother than butter but war was
in his heart his words were softer than oil yet were they
drawn swords.
cast thy burden upon the lord and he shall sustain thee he
shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.
but thou O God shalt bring them down into the pit of
destruction bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half
their days but I will trust in thee.
be merciful unto me O God for man would swallow me up he
fighting daily oppresseth me.
mine enemies would daily swallow me up for they be many that
fight against me O thou most high.
what time I Am afraid I will trust in thee.
in God I will praise his word in God I have put my trust I
will not fear what flesh can do unto me.
every day they wrest my words all their thoughts are against
me for evil.
they gather themselves together they hide themselves they
Mark my steps when they wait for my soul.
shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the
people O God.
thou tellest my wanderings put thou my tears into thy bottle
are they not in thy book?
when I cry unto thee then shall mine enemies turn back this
I know for God is for me.
in God will I praise his word in the lord will I praise his
word.
in God have I put my trust I will not be afraid what man can
do unto me.
thy vows are upon me O God I will render praises unto thee.
for thou hast delivered my soul from death wilt not thou
deliver my feet from falling that I may walk before God in
the light of the living?
be merciful unto me O God be merciful unto me for my soul
trusteth in thee yea in the shadow of thy wings will I make
my refuge until these calamities be overpast.
I will cry unto God most high unto God that performeth all
things for me.
he shall send from heaven and save me from the reproach of
him that would swallow me up. Selah. God shall send forth his
mercy and his truth.
my soul is among lions and I lie even among them that are set
on fire even the sons of men whose teeth are spears and
arrows and their tongue a Sharp sword.
be thou exalted O God above the heavens let thy glory be
above all the earth.
they have prepared a net for my steps my soul is bowed down
they have digged a pit before me into the midst whereof they
are fallen themselves. Selah.
my heart is fixed O God my heart is fixed I will sing and
give praise.
awake up my glory awake psaltery and harp I myself will
awake early.
I will praise thee O lord among the people I will sing unto
thee among the nations.
for thy mercy is great unto the heavens and thy truth unto
the clouds.
be thou exalted O God above the heavens let thy glory be
above all the earth.
do ye indeed speak righteousness O congregation? do ye judge
uprightly O ye sons of men?
yea in heart ye work wickedness ye weigh the violence of
your hands in the earth.
the wicked are estranged from the womb they go astray as soon
as they be born speaking lies.
their poison is like the poison of a serpent they are like
the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear
which will not hearken to the voice of charmers charming
never so wisely.
break their teeth O God in their mouth break out the great
teeth of the young lions O lord.
let them melt away as waters which run continually when he
bendeth his bow to shoot his arrows let them be as cut in
pieces.
as a snail which melteth let every one of them pass away
like the untimely birth of a woman that they may not see the
sun.
before your pots can feel the thorns he shall take them away
as with a whirlwind both living and in his wrath.
the righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance he
shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.
so that a man shall say verily there is a reward for the
righteous verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth.
deliver me from mine enemies O my God defend me from them
that rise up against me.
deliver me from the workers of iniquity and save me from
bloody men.
for lo they lie in wait for my soul the Mighty are gathered
against me not for my transgression nor for my Sin O lord.
they run and prepare themselves without my fault awake to
help me and behold.
thou therefore O lord God of hosts the God of Israel awake
to visit all the heathen be not merciful to any wicked
transgressors. Selah.
they return at evening they make a noise like a dog and go
round about the city.
behold they belch out with their mouth swords are in their
lips for who say they doth hear?
but thou O lord shalt laugh at them thou shalt have all the
heathen in derision.
because of his strength will I wait upon thee for God is my
defence.
the God of my mercy shall prevent me God shall let me see my
desire upon mine enemies.
slay them not lest my people forget scatter them by thy
power and bring them down O lord our shield.
for the Sin of their mouth and the words of their lips let
them even be taken in their pride and for cursing and lying
which they speak.
consume them in wrath consume them that they may not be and
let them know that God ruleth in Jacob unto the ends of the
earth. Selah.
and at evening let them return and let them make a noise like
a dog and go round about the city.
let them wander up and down for meat and grudge if they be
not satisfied.
but I will sing of thy power yea I will sing aloud of thy
mercy in the morning for thou hast been my defence and refuge
in the day of my trouble.
unto thee O my strength will I sing for God is my defence
and the God of my mercy.
O God thou hast cast us off thou hast scattered us thou
hast been displeased O turn thyself to us again.
thou hast made the earth to tremble thou hast broken it heal
the breaches thereof for it shaketh.
thou hast shewed thy people hard things thou hast made us to
drink the wine of astonishment.
thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee that it may
be displayed because of the truth. Selah.
that thy beloved may be delivered save with thy right hand
and hear me.
God hath spoken in his holiness I will rejoice I will divide
Shechem and mete out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine and Manasseh is mine Ephraim also is the
strength of mine head Judah is my lawgiver
Moab is my washpot over Edom will I cast out my shoe
Philistia triumph thou because of me.
who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into
Edom?
wilt not thou O God which hadst cast us off? and thou O
God which didst not go out with our armies?
give us help from trouble for vain is the help of man.
through God we shall do valiantly for he it is that shall
tread down our enemies.
hear my cry O God attend unto my prayer.
from the end of the earth will I cry unto thee when my heart
is overwhelmed lead me to the rock that is higher than I.
for thou hast been a shelter for me and a strong tower from
the enemy.
I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever I will trust in the
covert of thy wings. Selah.
for thou O God hast heard my vows thou hast given me the
heritage of those that fear thy name.
thou wilt prolong the king s life and his years as many
generations.
he shall abide before God for ever O prepare mercy and truth
which may preserve him.
so will I sing praise unto thy name for ever that I may daily
perform my vows.
truly my soul waiteth upon God from him cometh my salvation.
he only is my rock and my salvation he is my defence I shall
not be greatly moved.
how long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be
slain all of you as a bowing wall shall ye be and as a
tottering fence.
they only consult to cast him down from his excellency they
delight in lies they bless with their mouth but they curse
inwardly. Selah.
my soul wait thou only upon God for my expectation is from
him.
he only is my rock and my salvation he is my defence I shall
not be moved.
in God is my salvation and my glory the rock of my strength
and my refuge is in God.
trust in him at all times ye people pour out your heart
before him God is a refuge for us. Selah.
surely men of low degree are vanity and men of high degree
are a lie to be laid in the balance they are altogether
lighter than vanity.
trust not in oppression and become not vain in robbery if
Riches increase set not your heart upon them.
God hath spoken once twice have I heard this that power
belongeth unto God.
also unto thee O lord belongeth mercy for thou renderest to
every man according to his work.
O God thou art my God early will I seek thee my soul
thirsteth for thee my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and
thirsty land where no water is
to see thy power and thy glory so as I have seen thee in the
sanctuary.
because thy lovingkindness is better than life my lips shall
praise thee.
thus will I bless thee while I live I will lift up my hands
in thy name.
my soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness and my
mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips
when I remember thee upon my bed and meditate on thee in the
night watches.
because thou hast been my help therefore in the shadow of thy
wings will I rejoice.
my soul followeth hard after thee thy right hand upholdeth
me.
but those that seek my soul to destroy it shall go into the
lower parts of the earth.
they shall fall by the sword they shall be a portion for
foxes.
but the king shall rejoice in God every one that sweareth by
him shall glory but the mouth of them that speak lies shall
be stopped.
hear my voice O God in my prayer preserve my life from fear
of the enemy.
hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked from the
insurrection of the workers of iniquity
who whet their tongue like a sword and bend their bows to
shoot their arrows even bitter words
that they may shoot in secret at the perfect suddenly do they
shoot at him and fear not.
they encourage themselves in an evil matter they commune of
laying snares privily they say who shall see them?
they search out iniquities they accomplish a diligent search
both the inward thought of every one of them and the heart
is deep.
but God shall shoot at them with an arrow suddenly shall they
be wounded.
so they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves
all that see them shall flee away.
and all men shall fear and shall declare the work of God for
they shall wisely consider of his doing.
the righteous shall be glad in the lord and shall trust in
him and all the upright in heart shall glory.
praise waiteth for thee O God in Sion and unto thee shall
the vow be performed.
O thou that hearest prayer unto thee shall all flesh come.
iniquities prevail against me as for our transgressions thou
shalt purge them away.
blessed is the man whom thou choosest and causest to approach
unto thee that he may dwell in thy courts we shall be
satisfied with the goodness of thy house even of thy holy
temple.
by terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer us O God
of our salvation who art the confidence of all the ends of
the earth and of them that are afar off upon the sea
which by his strength setteth fast the mountains being girded
with power
which stilleth the noise of the seas the noise of their
waves and the tumult of the people.
they also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at thy
tokens thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening
to rejoice.
thou visitest the earth and waterest it thou greatly
enrichest it with the river of God which is full of water
thou preparest them corn when thou hast so provided for it.
thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly thou settlest the
furrows thereof thou makest it soft with showers thou
blessest the springing thereof.
thou crownest the year with thy goodness and thy paths drop
fatness.
they drop upon the pastures of the wilderness and the little
hills rejoice on every side.
the pastures are clothed with flocks the valleys also are
covered over with corn they shout for joy they also sing.
make a joyful noise unto God all ye lands
sing forth the honour of his name make his praise glorious.
say unto God how terrible art thou in thy works through the
greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves
unto thee.
all the earth shall worship thee and shall sing unto thee
they shall sing to thy name. Selah.
come and see the works of God he is terrible in his doing
toward the children of men.
he turned the sea into dry land they went through the flood
on foot there did we rejoice in him.
he ruleth by his power for ever his eyes behold the nations
let not the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.
O bless our God ye people and make the voice of his praise
to be heard
which holdeth our soul in life and suffereth not our feet to
be moved.
for thou O God hast proved us thou hast tried us as Silver
is tried.
thou broughtest us into the net thou laidst affliction upon
our loins.
thou hast caused men to ride over our heads we went through
fire and through water but thou broughtest us out into a
wealthy place.
I will go into thy house with burnt offerings I will pay thee
my vows
which my lips have uttered and my mouth hath spoken when I
was in trouble.
I will offer unto thee burnt sacrifices of fatlings with the
incense of rams I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.
come and hear all ye that fear God and I will declare what
he hath done for my soul.
I cried unto him with my mouth and he was extolled with my
tongue.
if I regard iniquity in my heart the lord will not hear me
but verily God hath heard me he hath attended to the voice of
my prayer.
blessed be God which hath not turned away my prayer nor his
mercy from me.
God be merciful unto us and bless us and cause his face to
shine upon us Selah.
that thy way may be known upon earth thy saving health among
all nations.
let the people praise thee O God let all the people praise
thee.
O let the nations be glad and sing for joy for thou shalt
judge the people righteously and govern the nations upon
earth. Selah.
let the people praise thee O God let all the people praise
thee.
then shall the earth yield her increase and God even our own
God shall bless us.
God shall bless us and all the ends of the earth shall fear
him.
let God Arise let his enemies be scattered let them also
that hate him flee before him.
as smoke is driven away so drive them away as wax melteth
before the fire so let the wicked perish at the presence of
God.
but let the righteous be glad let them rejoice before God
yea let them exceedingly rejoice.
sing unto God sing praises to his name extol him that rideth
upon the heavens by his name Jah and rejoice before him.
a father of the fatherless and a judge of the widows is God
in his holy habitation.
God setteth the solitary in families he bringeth out those
which are bound with chains but the rebellious dwell in a dry
land.
O God when thou wentest forth before thy people when thou
didst march through the wilderness Selah
the earth shook the heavens also dropped at the presence of
God even Sinai itself was moved at the presence of God the
God of Israel.
thou O God didst send a plentiful rain whereby thou didst
confirm thine inheritance when it was weary.
thy congregation hath dwelt therein thou O God hast
prepared of thy goodness for the poor.
the lord gave the word great was the company of those that
published it.
kings of armies did flee apace and she that tarried at home
divided the spoil.
though ye have lien among the pots yet shall ye be as the
wings of a dove covered with Silver and her feathers with
yellow gold.
when the almighty scattered kings in it it was white as snow
in Salmon.
the hill of God is as the hill of Bashan an high hill as the
hill of Bashan.
why leap ye ye high hills? this is the hill which God
desireth to dwell in yea the lord will dwell in it for ever.
the chariots of God are twenty thousand even thousands of
angels the lord is among them as in Sinai in the holy
place.
thou hast ascended on high thou hast led captivity captive
thou hast received gifts for men yea for the rebellious
also that the lord God might dwell among them.
blessed be the lord who daily loadeth us with benefits even
the God of our salvation. Selah.
he that is our God is the God of salvation and unto God the
lord belong the issues from death.
but God shall wound the head of his enemies and the hairy
scalp of such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses.
the lord said I will bring again from Bashan I will bring my
people again from the depths of the sea
that thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies and
the tongue of thy dogs in the same.
they have seen thy goings O God even the goings of my God
my king in the sanctuary.
the singers went before the players on instruments followed
after among them were the damsels playing with timbrels.
bless ye God in the congregations even the lord from the
fountain of Israel.
there is little Benjamin with their ruler the princes of
Judah and their council the princes of Zebulun and the
princes of Naphtali.
thy God hath commanded thy strength strengthen O God that
which thou hast wrought for us.
because of thy temple at Jerusalem shall kings bring presents
unto thee.
rebuke the company of spearmen the multitude of the bulls
with the calves of the people till every one submit himself
with pieces of Silver scatter thou the people that delight in
war.
princes shall come out of Egypt Ethiopia shall soon stretch
out her hands unto God.
sing unto God ye kingdoms of the earth O sing praises unto
the lord Selah
to him that rideth upon the heavens of heavens which were of
old lo he doth send out his voice and that a Mighty voice.
ascribe ye strength unto God his excellency is over Israel
and his strength is in the clouds.
O God thou art terrible out of thy holy places the God of
Israel is he that giveth strength and power unto his people.
blessed be God.
save me O God for the waters are come in unto my soul.
I sink in deep mire where there is no standing I Am come
into deep waters where the floods overflow me.
I Am weary of my crying my throat is dried mine eyes fail
while I wait for my God.
they that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of
mine head they that would destroy me being mine enemies
wrongfully are Mighty then I restored that which I took not
away.
O God thou knowest my foolishness and my sins are not hid
from thee.
let not them that wait on thee O lord God of hosts be
ashamed for my sake let not those that seek thee be
confounded for my sake O God of Israel.
because for thy sake I have borne reproach shame hath covered
my face.
I Am become a stranger unto my brethren and an alien unto my
mother s children.
for the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up and the
reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.
when I wept and chastened my soul with fasting that was to
my reproach.
I made sackcloth also my garment and I became a proverb to
them.
they that sit in the gate speak against me and I was the song
of the drunkards.
but as for me my prayer is unto thee O lord in an
acceptable time O God in the multitude of thy mercy hear me
in the truth of thy salvation.
deliver me out of the mire and let me not sink let me be
delivered from them that hate me and out of the deep waters.
let not the waterflood overflow me Neither let the deep
swallow me up and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.
hear me O lord for thy lovingkindness is good turn unto me
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.
and hide not thy face from thy servant for I Am in trouble
hear me speedily.
draw nigh unto my soul and redeem it deliver me because of
mine enemies.
thou hast known my reproach and my shame and my dishonour
mine adversaries are all before thee.
reproach hath broken my heart and I Am full of heaviness and
I looked for some to take pity but there was none and for
comforters but I found none.
they gave me also gall for my meat and in my thirst they gave
me vinegar to drink.
let their table become a snare before them and that which
should have been for their welfare let it become a trap.
let their eyes be darkened that they see not and make their
loins continually to shake.
pour out thine indignation upon them and let thy wrathful
anger take hold of them.
let their habitation be desolate and let none dwell in their
tents.
for they persecute him whom thou hast smitten and they talk
to the grief of those whom thou hast wounded.
add iniquity unto their iniquity and let them not come into
thy righteousness.
let them be blotted out of the book of the living and not be
written with the righteous.
but I Am poor and sorrowful let thy salvation O God set me
up on high.
I will praise the name of God with a song and will magnify
him with thanksgiving.
this also shall please the lord better than an ox or bullock
that hath horns and hoofs.
the humble shall see this and be glad and your heart shall
live that seek God.
for the lord heareth the poor and despiseth not his
prisoners.
let the heaven and earth praise him the seas and every thing
that moveth therein.
for God will save Zion and will build the cities of Judah
that they may dwell there and have it in possession.
the seed also of his servants shall inherit it and they that
love his name shall dwell therein.
make haste O God to deliver me make haste to help me O
lord.
let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul
let them be turned backward and put to confusion that desire
my hurt.
let them be turned back for a reward of their shame that say
aha aha.
let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee and
let such as love thy salvation say continually let God be
magnified.
but I Am poor and needy make haste unto me O God thou art
my help and my deliverer O lord make no tarrying.
in thee O lord do I put my trust let me never be put to
confusion.
deliver me in thy righteousness and cause me to escape
incline thine ear unto me and save me.
be thou my strong habitation whereunto I may continually
resort thou hast given commandment to save me for thou art
my rock and my fortress.
deliver me O my God out of the hand of the wicked out of
the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man.
for thou art my hope O lord God thou art my trust from my
youth.
by thee have I been holden up from the womb thou art he that
took me out of my mother s bowels my praise shall be
continually of thee.
I Am as a wonder unto many but thou art my strong refuge.
let my mouth be filled with thy praise and with thy honour all
the day.
cast me not off in the time of old age forsake me not when my
strength faileth.
for mine enemies speak against me and they that lay wait for
my soul take counsel together
saying God hath forsaken him persecute and take him for
there is none to deliver him.
O God be not far from me O my God make haste for my help.
let them be confounded and consumed that are adversaries to my
soul let them be covered with reproach and dishonour that
seek my hurt.
but I will hope continually and will yet praise thee more and
more.
my mouth shall shew forth thy righteousness and thy salvation
all the day for I know not the numbers thereof.
I will go in the strength of the lord God I will make mention
of thy righteousness even of thine only.
O God thou hast taught me from my youth and hitherto have I
declared thy wondrous works.
now also when I Am old and greyheaded O God forsake me not
until I have shewed thy strength unto this generation and thy
power to every one that is to come.
thy righteousness also O God is very high who hast done
great things O God who is like unto thee
thou which hast shewed me great and sore troubles shalt
quicken me again and shalt bring me up again from the depths
of the earth.
thou shalt increase my greatness and comfort me on every
side.
I will also praise thee with the psaltery even thy truth O
my God unto thee will I sing with the harp O thou holy one
of Israel.
my lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee and my
soul which thou hast redeemed.
my tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day
long for they are confounded for they are brought unto
shame that seek my hurt.
give the king thy judgments O God and thy righteousness unto
the king s son.
he shall judge thy people with righteousness and thy poor
with judgment.
the mountains shall bring peace to the people and the little
hills by righteousness.
he shall judge the poor of the people he shall save the
children of the needy and shall break in pieces the
oppressor.
they shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure
throughout all generations.
he shall come down like rain upon the mown grass as showers
that water the earth.
in his days shall the righteous flourish and abundance of
peace so long as the moon endureth.
he shall have dominion also from sea to sea and from the
river unto the ends of the earth.
they that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him and
his enemies shall lick the dust.
the kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents
the kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.
yea all kings shall fall down before him all nations shall
serve him.
for he shall deliver the needy when he crieth the poor also
and him that hath no helper.
he shall spare the poor and needy and shall save the souls of
the needy.
he shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence and
precious shall their blood be in his sight.
and he shall live and to him shall be given of the gold of
Sheba prayer also shall be made for him continually and
daily shall he be praised.
there shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of
the mountains the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon and
they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.
his name shall endure for ever his name shall be continued as
long as the sun and men shall be blessed in him all nations
shall call him blessed.
blessed be the lord God the God of Israel who only doeth
wondrous things.
and blessed be his glorious name for ever and let the whole
earth be filled with his glory Amen and Amen.
the prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended.
truly God is good to Israel even to such as are of a clean
heart.
but as for me my feet were almost gone my steps had well
nigh slipped.
for I was envious at the foolish when I saw the prosperity of
the wicked.
for there are no Bands in their death but their strength is
firm.
they are not in trouble as other men Neither are they plagued
like other men.
therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain violence
covereth them as a garment.
their eyes stand out with fatness they have more than heart
could wish.
they are corrupt and speak wickedly concerning oppression
they speak loftily.
they set their mouth against the heavens and their tongue
walketh through the earth.
therefore his people return hither and waters of a full cup
are wrung out to them.
and they say how doth God know? and is there knowledge in the
most high?
behold these are the ungodly who prosper in the world they
increase in Riches.
verily I have cleansed my heart in vain and washed my hands
in innocency.
for all the day long have I been plagued and chastened every
morning.
if I say I will speak thus behold I should offend against
the generation of thy children.
when I thought to know this it was too painful for me
until I went into the sanctuary of God then understood I
their end.
surely thou didst set them in slippery places thou castedst
them down into destruction.
how are they brought into desolation as in a moment they are
utterly consumed with terrors.
as a dream when one awaketh so O lord when thou awakest
thou shalt despise their image.
thus my heart was grieved and I was pricked in my reins.
so foolish was I and ignorant I was as a beast before thee.
nevertheless I Am continually with thee thou hast holden me
by my right hand.
thou shalt guide me with thy counsel and afterward receive me
to glory.
whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire beside thee.
my flesh and my heart faileth but God is the strength of my
heart and my portion for ever.
for lo they that are far from thee shall perish thou hast
destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee.
but it is good for me to draw near to God I have put my trust
in the lord God that I may declare all thy works.
O God why hast thou cast us off for ever? why doth thine
anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture?
remember thy congregation which thou hast purchased of old
the rod of thine inheritance which thou hast redeemed this
mount Zion wherein thou hast dwelt.
lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations even all that
the enemy hath done wickedly in the sanctuary.
thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations they set
up their ensigns for signs.
a man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the
thick trees.
but now they break down the carved work thereof at once with
axes and hammers.
they have cast fire into thy sanctuary they have defiled by
casting down the dwelling place of thy name to the ground.
they said in their hearts let us destroy them together they
have burned up all the synagogues of God in the land.
we see not our signs there is no more any prophet Neither is
there among us any that knoweth how long.
O God how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy
blaspheme thy name for ever?
why withdrawest thou thy hand even thy right hand? pluck it
out of thy bosom.
for God is my king of old working salvation in the midst of
the earth.
thou didst divide the sea by thy strength thou brakest the
heads of the dragons in the waters.
thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces and Gavest him
to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.
thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood thou driedst up
Mighty rivers.
the day is thine the night also is thine thou hast prepared
the light and the sun.
thou hast set all the borders of the earth thou hast made
summer and winter.
remember this that the enemy hath reproached O lord and
that the foolish people have blasphemed thy name.
O deliver not the soul of thy turtledove unto the multitude of
the wicked forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.
have respect unto the covenant for the dark places of the
earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.
O let not the oppressed return ashamed let the poor and needy
praise thy name.
Arise O God plead thine own cause remember how the foolish
man reproacheth thee daily.
forget not the voice of thine enemies the tumult of those
that rise up against thee increaseth continually.
unto thee O God do we give thanks unto thee do we give
thanks for that thy name is near thy wondrous works declare.
when I shall receive the congregation I will judge uprightly.
the earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved I
bear up the pillars of it. Selah.
I said unto the fools deal not foolishly and to the wicked
lift not up the horn
lift not up your horn on high speak not with a stiff neck.
for promotion cometh Neither from the east nor from the west
nor from the south.
but God is the judge he putteth down one and setteth up
another.
for in the hand of the lord there is a cup and the wine is
red it is full of mixture and he poureth out of the same
but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring
them out and drink them.
but I will declare for ever I will sing praises to the God of
Jacob.
all the horns of the wicked also will I cut off but the horns
of the righteous shall be exalted.
in Judah is God known his name is great in Israel.
in Salem also is his tabernacle and his dwelling place in
Zion.
there brake he the arrows of the bow the shield and the
sword and the battle. Selah.
thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of
prey.
the stouthearted are spoiled they have slept their sleep and
none of the men of might have found their hands.
at thy rebuke O God of Jacob both the chariot and horse are
cast into a dead sleep.
thou even thou art to be feared and who may stand in thy
sight when once thou art angry?
thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven the earth
feared and was still
when God arose to judgment to save all the meek of the earth.
Selah.
surely the wrath of man shall praise thee the remainder of
wrath shalt thou restrain.
vow and pay unto the lord your God let all that be round
about him bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.
he shall cut off the spirit of princes he is terrible to the
kings of the earth.
I cried unto God with my voice even unto God with my voice
and he gave ear unto me.
in the day of my trouble I sought the lord my sore ran in the
night and ceased not my soul refused to be comforted.
I remembered God and was troubled I complained and my
spirit was overwhelmed. Selah.
thou holdest mine eyes waking I Am so troubled that I cannot
speak.
I have considered the days of old the years of ancient times.
I call to remembrance my song in the night I commune with
mine own heart and my spirit made diligent search.
will the lord cast off for ever? and will he be favourable no
more?
is his mercy clean gone for ever? doth his promise fail for
evermore?
hath God forgotten to be gracious? hath he in anger shut up
his tender mercies? Selah.
and I said this is my infirmity but I will remember the
years of the right hand of the most high.
I will remember the works of the lord surely I will remember
thy wonders of old.
I will meditate also of all thy work and talk of thy doings.
thy way O God is in the sanctuary who is so great a God as
our God?
thou art the God that doest wonders thou hast declared thy
strength among the people.
thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people the sons of
Jacob and Joseph. Selah.
the waters saw thee O God the waters saw thee they were
afraid the depths also were troubled.
the clouds poured out water the skies sent out a sound thine
arrows also went abroad.
the voice of thy thunder was in the heaven the lightnings
lightened the world the earth trembled and shook.
thy way is in the sea and thy path in the great waters and
thy footsteps are not known.
thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and
Aaron.
give ear O my people to my law incline your ears to the
words of my mouth.
I will open my mouth in a parable I will utter dark sayings
of old
which we have heard and known and our fathers have told us.
we will not hide them from their children shewing to the
generation to come the praises of the lord and his strength
and his wonderful works that he hath done.
for he established a testimony in Jacob and appointed a law
in Israel which he commanded our fathers that they should
make them known to their children
that the generation to come might know them even the children
which should be born who should Arise and declare them to
their children
that they might set their hope in God and not forget the
works of God but keep his commandments
and might not be as their fathers a stubborn and rebellious
generation a generation that set not their heart aright and
whose spirit was not stedfast with God.
the children of Ephraim being armed and carrying bows
turned back in the day of battle.
they kept not the covenant of God and refused to walk in his
law
and forgat his works and his wonders that he had shewed them.
marvellous things did he in the sight of their fathers in the
land of Egypt in the field of Zoan.
he divided the sea and caused them to pass through and he
made the waters to stand as an heap.
in the daytime also he led them with a cloud and all the
night with a light of fire.
he clave the rocks in the wilderness and gave them drink as
out of the great depths.
he brought streams also out of the rock and caused waters to
run down like rivers.
and they sinned yet more against him by provoking the most
high in the wilderness.
and they tempted God in their heart by asking meat for their
lust.
yea they spake against God they said can God furnish a
table in the wilderness?
behold he smote the rock that the waters gushed out and the
streams overflowed can he give bread also? can he provide
flesh for his people?
therefore the lord heard this and was wroth so a fire was
kindled against Jacob and anger also came up against Israel
because they believed not in God and trusted not in his
salvation
though he had commanded the clouds from above and opened the
doors of heaven
and had rained down Manna upon them to eat and had given them
of the corn of heaven.
man did eat angels food he sent them meat to the full.
he caused an east wind to blow in the heaven and by his power
he brought in the south wind.
he rained flesh also upon them as dust and feathered fowls
like as the sand of the sea
and he let it fall in the midst of their camp round about
their habitations.
so they did eat and were well filled for he gave them their
own desire
they were not estranged from their lust. but while their meat
was yet in their mouths
the wrath of God came upon them and slew the fattest of them
and smote down the chosen men of Israel.
for all this they sinned still and believed not for his
wondrous works.
therefore their days did he consume in vanity and their years
in trouble.
when he slew them then they sought him and they returned and
enquired early after God.
and they remembered that God was their rock and the high God
their redeemer.
nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth and they
lied unto him with their tongues.
for their heart was not right with him Neither were they
stedfast in his covenant.
but he being full of compassion forgave their iniquity and
destroyed them not yea many a time turned he his anger away
and did not stir up all his wrath.
for he remembered that they were but flesh a wind that
passeth away and cometh not again.
how oft did they provoke him in the wilderness and grieve him
in the desert
yea they turned back and tempted God and limited the holy
one of Israel.
they remembered not his hand nor the day when he delivered
them from the enemy.
how he had wrought his signs in Egypt and his wonders in the
field of Zoan.
and had turned their rivers into blood and their floods that
they could not drink.
he sent divers sorts of flies among them which devoured them
and frogs which destroyed them.
he gave also their increase unto the caterpiller and their
labour unto the locust.
he destroyed their vines with hail and their sycomore trees
with frost.
he gave up their cattle also to the hail and their flocks to
hot thunderbolts.
he cast upon them the fierceness of his anger wrath and
indignation and trouble by sending evil angels among them.
he made a way to his anger he spared not their soul from
death but gave their life over to the pestilence
and smote all the firstborn in Egypt the chief of their
strength in the tabernacles of Ham
but made his own people to go forth like sheep and guided
them in the wilderness like a flock.
and he led them on safely so that they feared not but the
sea overwhelmed their enemies.
and he brought them to the border of his sanctuary even to
this mountain which his right hand had purchased.
he cast out the heathen also before them and divided them an
inheritance by line and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in
their tents.
yet they tempted and provoked the most high God and kept not
his testimonies
but turned back and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers
they were turned aside like a deceitful bow.
for they provoked him to anger with their high places and
moved him to jealousy with their graven images.
when God heard this he was wroth and greatly abhorred
Israel
so that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh the tent which he
placed among men
and delivered his strength into captivity and his glory into
the enemy s hand.
he gave his people over also unto the sword and was wroth
with his inheritance.
the fire consumed their young men and their maidens were not
given to marriage.
their priests fell by the sword and their widows made no
lamentation.
then the lord awaked as one out of sleep and like a Mighty
man that shouteth by reason of wine.
and he smote his enemies in the hinder parts he put them to a
perpetual reproach.
moreover he refused the tabernacle of Joseph and chose not
the tribe of Ephraim
but chose the tribe of Judah the mount Zion which he loved.
and he built his sanctuary like high palaces like the earth
which he hath established for ever.
he chose David also his servant and took him from the
sheepfolds
from following the ewes great with young he brought him to
feed Jacob his people and Israel his inheritance.
so he fed them according to the integrity of his heart and
guided them by the skilfulness of his hands.
O God the heathen are come into thine inheritance thy holy
temple have they defiled they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.
the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat
unto the fowls of the heaven the flesh of thy saints unto the
beasts of the earth.
their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem
and there was none to bury them.
we are become a reproach to our neighbours a scorn and
derision to them that are round about us.
how long lord? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy
jealousy burn like fire?
pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee
and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.
for they have devoured Jacob and laid waste his dwelling
place.
O remember not against us former iniquities let thy tender
mercies speedily prevent us for we are brought very low.
help us O God of our salvation for the glory of thy name
and deliver us and purge away our sins for thy name s sake.
wherefore should the heathen say where is their God? let him
be known among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of
the blood of thy servants which is shed.
let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee according to
the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are
appointed to die
and render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom
their reproach wherewith they have reproached thee O lord.
so we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee
thanks for ever we will shew forth thy praise to all
generations.
give ear O Shepherd of Israel thou that leadest Joseph like
a flock thou that dwellest between the Cherubims shine
forth.
before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh stir up thy strength
and come and save us.
turn us again O God and cause thy face to shine and we
shall be saved.
O lord God of hosts how long wilt thou be angry against the
prayer of thy people?
thou feedest them with the bread of tears and givest them
tears to drink in great measure.
thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours and our enemies
laugh among themselves.
turn us again O God of hosts and cause thy face to shine
and we shall be saved.
thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt thou hast cast out the
heathen and planted it.
thou preparedst room before it and didst cause it to take
deep root and it filled the land.
the hills were covered with the shadow of it and the boughs
thereof were like the goodly cedars.
she sent out her boughs unto the sea and her branches unto
the river.
why hast thou then broken down her hedges so that all they
which pass by the way do pluck her?
the boar out of the wood doth waste it and the wild beast of
the field doth devour it.
return we beseech thee O God of hosts look down from
heaven and behold and visit this vine
and the vineyard which thy right hand hath planted and the
branch that thou madest strong for thyself.
it is burned with fire it is cut down they perish at the
rebuke of thy countenance.
let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand upon the son
of man whom thou madest strong for thyself.
so will not we go back from thee quicken us and we will call
upon thy name.
turn us again O lord God of hosts cause thy face to shine
and we shall be saved.
sing aloud unto God our strength make a joyful noise unto the
God of Jacob.
take a psalm and bring hither the timbrel the pleasant harp
with the psaltery.
blow up the trumpet in the new moon in the time appointed on
our solemn feast day.
for this was a statute for Israel and a law of the God of
Jacob.
this he ordained in Joseph for a testimony when he went out
through the land of Egypt where I heard a language that I
understood not.
I removed his shoulder from the burden his hands were
delivered from the pots.
thou calledst in trouble and I delivered thee I answered
thee in the secret place of thunder I proved thee at the
waters of Meribah. Selah.
hear O my people and I will testify unto thee O Israel if
thou wilt hearken unto me
there shall no strange God be in thee Neither shalt thou
worship any strange God.
I Am the lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt open thy mouth wide and I will fill it.
but my people would not hearken to my voice and Israel would
none of me.
so I gave them up unto their own hearts lust and they walked
in their own counsels.
oh that my people had hearkened unto me and Israel had walked
in my ways
I should soon have subdued their enemies and turned my hand
against their adversaries.
the haters of the lord should have submitted themselves unto
him but their time should have endured for ever.
he should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat and
with honey out of the rock should I have satisfied thee.
God standeth in the congregation of the Mighty he judgeth
among the gods.
how long will ye judge unjustly and accept the persons of the
wicked? Selah.
defend the poor and fatherless do justice to the afflicted
and needy.
deliver the poor and needy rid them out of the hand of the
wicked.
they know not Neither will they understand they walk on in
darkness all the foundations of the earth are out of course.
I have said ye are gods and all of you are children of the
most high.
but ye shall die like men and fall like one of the princes.
Arise O God judge the earth for thou shalt inherit all
nations.
keep not thou silence O God hold not thy peace and be not
still O God.
for lo thine enemies make a tumult and they that hate thee
have lifted up the head.
they have taken crafty counsel against thy people and
consulted against thy hidden ones.
they have said come and let us cut them off from being a
nation that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.
for they have consulted together with one consent they are
confederate against thee
the tabernacles of Edom and the Ishmaelites of Moab and the
Hagarenes
Gebal and Ammon and Amalek the Philistines with the
inhabitants of Tyre
Assur also is joined with them they have holpen the children
of Lot. Selah.
do unto them as unto the Midianites as to Sisera as to
Jabin at the brook of Kison
which perished at Endor they became as dung for the earth.
make their nobles like Oreb and like Zeeb yea all their
princes as Zebah and as Zalmunna
who said let us take to ourselves the houses of God in
possession.
O my God make them like a wheel as the stubble before the
wind.
as the fire burneth a wood and as the flame setteth the
mountains on fire
so persecute them with thy tempest and make them afraid with
thy storm.
fill their faces with shame that they may seek thy name O
lord.
let them be confounded and troubled for ever yea let them be
put to shame and perish
that men may know that thou whose name alone is Jehovah art
the most high over all the earth.
how amiable are thy tabernacles O lord of hosts
my soul longeth yea even fainteth for the courts of the
lord my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God.
yea the sparrow hath found an house and the swallow a nest
for herself where she may lay her young even thine altars O
lord of hosts my king and my God.
blessed are they that dwell in thy house they will be still
praising thee. Selah.
blessed is the man whose strength is in thee in whose heart
are the ways of them.
who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well the
rain also filleth the pools.
they go from strength to strength every one of them in Zion
appeareth before God.
O lord God of hosts hear my prayer give ear O God of Jacob.
Selah.
behold O God our shield and look upon the face of thine
anointed.
for a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had
rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God than to dwell
in the tents of wickedness.
for the lord God is a sun and shield the lord will give grace
and glory no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly.
O lord of hosts blessed is the man that trusteth in thee.
lord thou hast been favourable unto thy land thou hast
brought back the captivity of Jacob.
thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people thou hast
covered all their Sin. Selah.
thou hast taken away all thy wrath thou hast turned thyself
from the fierceness of thine anger.
turn us O God of our salvation and cause thine anger toward
us to cease.
wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine
anger to all generations?
wilt thou not revive us again that thy people may rejoice in
thee?
shew us thy mercy O lord and grant us thy salvation.
I will hear what God the lord will speak for he will speak
peace unto his people and to his saints but let them not
turn again to folly.
surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him that glory
may dwell in our land.
mercy and truth are met together righteousness and peace have
kissed each other.
truth shall spring out of the earth and righteousness shall
look down from heaven.
yea the lord shall give that which is good and our land
shall yield her increase.
righteousness shall go before him and shall set us in the way
of his steps.
bow down thine ear O lord hear me for I Am poor and needy.
preserve my soul for I Am holy O thou my God save thy
servant that trusteth in thee.
be merciful unto me O lord for I cry unto thee daily.
rejoice the soul of thy servant for unto thee O lord do I
lift up my soul.
for thou lord art good and ready to forgive and plenteous
in mercy unto all them that call upon thee.
give ear O lord unto my prayer and attend to the voice of
my supplications.
in the day of my trouble I will call upon thee for thou wilt
answer me.
among the gods there is none like unto thee O lord Neither
are there any works like unto thy works.
all nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before
thee O lord and shall glorify thy name.
for thou art great and doest wondrous things thou art God
alone.
teach me thy way O lord I will walk in thy truth unite my
heart to fear thy name.
I will praise thee O lord my God with all my heart and I
will glorify thy name for evermore.
for great is thy mercy toward me and thou hast delivered my
soul from the lowest hell.
O God the proud are risen against me and the assemblies of
violent men have sought after my soul and have not set thee
before them.
but thou O lord art a God full of compassion and gracious
longsuffering and plenteous in mercy and truth.
O turn unto me and have mercy upon me give thy strength unto
thy servant and save the son of thine handmaid.
shew me a token for good that they which hate me may see it
and be ashamed because thou lord hast holpen me and
comforted me.
his foundation is in the holy mountains.
the lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings
of Jacob.
glorious things are spoken of thee O city of God. Selah.
I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me
behold Philistia and Tyre with Ethiopia this man was born
there.
and of Zion it shall be said this and that man was born in
her and the highest himself shall establish her.
the lord shall count when he writeth up the people that this
man was born there. Selah.
as well the singers as the players on instruments shall be
there all my springs are in thee.
O lord God of my salvation I have cried day and night before
thee
let my prayer come before thee incline thine ear unto my cry
for my soul is full of troubles and my life draweth nigh unto
the grave.
I Am counted with them that go down into the pit I Am as a
man that hath no strength
free among the dead like the slain that lie in the grave
whom thou rememberest no more and they are cut off from thy
hand.
thou hast laid me in the lowest pit in darkness in the
deeps.
thy wrath lieth hard upon me and thou hast afflicted me with
all thy waves. Selah.
thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me thou hast
made me an abomination unto them I Am shut up and I cannot
come forth.
mine eye mourneth by reason of affliction lord I have called
daily upon thee I have stretched out my hands unto thee.
wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? shall the dead Arise and
praise thee? Selah.
shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave? or thy
faithfulness in destruction?
shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness
in the land of forgetfulness?
but unto thee have I cried O lord and in the morning shall
my prayer prevent thee.
lord why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face
from me?
I Am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up while I
suffer thy terrors I Am distracted.
thy fierce wrath goeth over me thy terrors have cut me off.
they came round about me daily like water they compassed me
about together.
lover and friend hast thou put far from me and mine
acquaintance into darkness.
I will sing of the mercies of the lord for ever with my mouth
will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations.
for I have said mercy shall be built up for ever thy
faithfulness shalt thou establish in the very heavens.
I have made a covenant with my chosen I have sworn unto David
my servant
thy seed will I establish for ever and build up thy throne to
all generations. Selah.
and the heavens shall praise thy wonders O lord thy
faithfulness also in the congregation of the saints.
for who in the heaven can be compared unto the lord? who among
the sons of the Mighty can be likened unto the lord?
God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints and
to be had in reverence of all them that are about him.
O lord God of hosts who is a strong lord like unto thee? or
to thy faithfulness round about thee?
thou rulest the raging of the sea when the waves thereof
Arise thou stillest them.
thou hast broken Rahab in pieces as one that is slain thou
hast scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.
the heavens are thine the earth also is thine as for the
world and the fulness thereof thou hast founded them.
the north and the south thou hast created them Tabor and
Hermon shall rejoice in thy name.
thou hast a Mighty arm strong is thy hand and high is thy
right hand.
justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne mercy
and truth shall go before thy face.
blessed is the people that know the joyful sound they shall
walk O lord in the light of thy countenance.
in thy name shall they rejoice all the day and in thy
righteousness shall they be exalted.
for thou art the glory of their strength and in thy favour
our horn shall be exalted.
for the lord is our defence and the holy one of Israel is our
king.
then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one and saidst I
have laid help upon one that is Mighty I have exalted one
chosen out of the people.
I have found David my servant with my holy oil have I
anointed him
with whom my hand shall be established mine arm also shall
strengthen him.
the enemy shall not exact upon him nor the son of wickedness
afflict him.
and I will beat down his foes before his face and plague them
that hate him.
but my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him and in my
name shall his horn be exalted.
I will set his hand also in the sea and his right hand in the
rivers.
he shall cry unto me thou art my father my God and the rock
of my salvation.
also I will make him my firstborn higher than the kings of
the earth.
my mercy will I keep for him for evermore and my covenant
shall stand fast with him.
his seed also will I make to endure for ever and his throne
as the days of heaven.
if his children forsake my law and walk not in my judgments
if they break my statutes and keep not my commandments
then will I visit their transgression with the rod and their
iniquity with stripes.
nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from
him nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.
my covenant will I not break nor alter the thing that is gone
out of my lips.
once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto
David.
his seed shall endure for ever and his throne as the sun
before me.
it shall be established for ever as the moon and as a
faithful witness in heaven. Selah.
but thou hast cast off and abhorred thou hast been wroth with
thine anointed.
thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant thou hast
profaned his crown by casting it to the ground.
thou hast broken down all his hedges thou hast brought his
strong holds to ruin.
all that pass by the way spoil him he is a reproach to his
neighbours.
thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries thou hast
made all his enemies to rejoice.
thou hast also turned the edge of his sword and hast not made
him to stand in the battle.
thou hast made his glory to cease and cast his throne down to
the ground.
the days of his youth hast thou shortened thou hast covered
him with shame. Selah.
how long lord? wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shall thy
wrath burn like fire?
remember how short my time is wherefore hast thou made all
men in vain?
what man is he that liveth and shall not see death? shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.
lord where are thy former lovingkindnesses which thou
swarest unto David in thy truth?
remember lord the reproach of thy servants how I do bear in
my bosom the reproach of all the Mighty people
wherewith thine enemies have reproached O lord wherewith
they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.
blessed be the lord for evermore. Amen and Amen.
lord thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.
before the mountains were brought forth or ever thou hadst
formed the earth and the world even from everlasting to
everlasting thou art God.
thou turnest man to destruction and sayest return ye
children of men.
for a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it
is past and as a watch in the night.
thou carriest them away as with a flood they are as a sleep
in the morning they are like grass which groweth up.
in the morning it flourisheth and groweth up in the evening
it is cut down and withereth.
for we are consumed by thine anger and by thy wrath are we
troubled.
thou hast set our iniquities before thee our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance.
for all our days are passed away in thy wrath we spend our
years as a tale that is told.
the days of our years are threescore years and Ten and if by
reason of strength they be fourscore years yet is their
strength labour and sorrow for it is soon cut off and we fly
away.
who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy
fear so is thy wrath.
so teach us to number our days that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.
return O lord how long? and let it repent thee concerning
thy servants.
O satisfy us early with thy mercy that we may rejoice and be
glad all our days.
make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted
us and the years wherein we have seen evil.
let thy work appear unto thy servants and thy glory unto
their children.
and let the beauty of the lord our God be upon us and
establish thou the work of our hands upon us yea the work of
our hands establish thou it.
he that dwelleth in the secret place of the most high shall
abide under the shadow of the almighty.
I will say of the lord he is my refuge and my fortress my
God in him will I trust.
surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler and
from the noisome pestilence.
he shall cover thee with his feathers and under his wings
shalt thou trust his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.
thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night nor for the
arrow that flieth by day
nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness nor for the
destruction that wasteth at noonday.
a thousand shall fall at thy side and Ten thousand at thy
right hand but it shall not come nigh thee.
only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of
the wicked.
because thou hast made the lord which is my refuge even the
most high thy habitation
there shall no evil befall thee Neither shall any plague come
nigh thy dwelling.
for he shall give his angels charge over thee to keep thee in
all thy ways.
they shall bear thee up in their hands lest thou dash thy
foot against a stone.
thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder the young lion and
the dragon shalt thou trample under feet.
because he hath set his love upon me therefore will I deliver
him I will set him on high because he hath known my name.
he shall call upon me and I will answer him I will be with
him in trouble I will deliver him and honour him.
with long life will I satisfy him and shew him my salvation.
it is a good thing to give thanks unto the lord and to sing
praises unto thy name O most high
to shew forth thy lovingkindness in the morning and thy
faithfulness every night
upon an instrument of Ten strings and upon the psaltery upon
the harp with a solemn sound.
for thou lord hast made me glad through thy work I will
triumph in the works of thy hands.
O lord how great are thy works and thy thoughts are very
deep.
a brutish man knoweth not Neither doth a fool understand
this.
when the wicked spring as the grass and when all the workers
of iniquity do flourish it is that they shall be destroyed
for ever
but thou lord art most high for evermore.
for lo thine enemies O lord for lo thine enemies shall
perish all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
but my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn I
shall be anointed with fresh oil.
mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies and mine
ears shall hear my desire of the wicked that rise up against
me.
the righteous shall flourish like the palm tree he shall grow
like a cedar in Lebanon.
those that be planted in the house of the lord shall flourish
in the courts of our God.
they shall still bring forth fruit in old age they shall be
fat and flourishing
to shew that the lord is upright he is my rock and there is
no unrighteousness in him.
the lord reigneth he is clothed with majesty the lord is
clothed with strength wherewith he hath girded himself the
world also is stablished that it cannot be moved.
thy throne is established of old thou art from everlasting.
the floods have lifted up O lord the floods have lifted up
their voice the floods lift up their waves.
the lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters
yea than the Mighty waves of the sea.
thy testimonies are very sure holiness becometh thine house
O lord for ever.
O lord God to whom vengeance belongeth O God to whom
vengeance belongeth shew thyself.
lift up thyself thou judge of the earth render a reward to
the proud.
lord how long shall the wicked how long shall the wicked
triumph?
how long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the
workers of iniquity boast themselves?
they break in pieces thy people O lord and afflict thine
heritage.
they slay the widow and the stranger and murder the
fatherless.
yet they say the lord shall not see Neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it.
understand ye brutish among the people and ye fools when
will ye be wise?
he that planted the ear shall he not hear? he that formed the
eye shall he not see?
he that chastiseth the heathen shall not he correct? he that
teacheth man knowledge shall not he know?
the lord knoweth the thoughts of man that they are vanity.
blessed is the man whom thou chastenest O lord and teachest
him out of thy law
that thou mayest give him rest from the days of adversity
until the pit be digged for the wicked.
for the lord will not cast off his people Neither will he
forsake his inheritance.
but judgment shall return unto righteousness and all the
upright in heart shall follow it.
who will rise up for me against the evildoers? or who will
stand up for me against the workers of iniquity?
unless the lord had been my help my soul had almost dwelt in
silence.
when I said my foot slippeth thy mercy O lord held me up.
in the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight
my soul.
shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee which
frameth mischief by a law?
they gather themselves together against the soul of the
righteous and condemn the innocent blood.
but the lord is my defence and my God is the rock of my
refuge.
and he shall bring upon them their own iniquity and shall cut
them off in their own wickedness yea the lord our God shall
cut them off.
O come let us sing unto the lord let us make a joyful noise
to the rock of our salvation.
let us come before his presence with thanksgiving and make a
joyful noise unto him with psalms.
for the lord is a great God and a great king above all gods.
in his hand are the deep places of the earth the strength of
the hills is his also.
the sea is his and he made it and his hands formed the dry
land.
O come let us worship and bow down let us kneel before the
lord our maker.
for he is our God and we are the people of his pasture and
the sheep of his hand. to day if ye will hear his voice
harden not your heart as in the provocation and as in the
day of temptation in the wilderness
when your fathers tempted me proved me and saw my work.
forty years long was I grieved with this generation and said
it is a people that do err in their heart and they have not
known my ways
unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into
my rest.
O sing unto the lord a new song sing unto the lord all the
earth.
sing unto the lord bless his name shew forth his salvation
from day to day.
declare his glory among the heathen his wonders among all
people.
for the lord is great and greatly to be praised he is to be
feared above all gods.
for all the gods of the nations are idols but the lord made
the heavens.
honour and majesty are before him strength and beauty are in
his sanctuary.
give unto the lord O ye kindreds of the people give unto the
lord glory and strength.
give unto the lord the glory due unto his name bring an
offering and come into his courts.
O worship the lord in the beauty of holiness fear before him
all the earth.
say among the heathen that the lord reigneth the world also
shall be established that it shall not be moved he shall
judge the people righteously.
let the heavens rejoice and let the earth be glad let the
sea roar and the fulness thereof.
let the field be joyful and all that is therein then shall
all the trees of the wood rejoice
before the lord for he cometh for he cometh to judge the
earth he shall judge the world with righteousness and the
people with his truth.
the lord reigneth let the earth rejoice let the multitude of
isles be glad thereof.
clouds and darkness are round about him righteousness and
judgment are the habitation of his throne.
a fire goeth before him and burneth up his enemies round
about.
his lightnings enlightened the world the earth saw and
trembled.
the hills melted like wax at the presence of the lord at the
presence of the lord of the whole earth.
the heavens declare his righteousness and all the people see
his glory.
confounded be all they that serve graven images that boast
themselves of idols worship him all ye gods.
Zion heard and was glad and the daughters of Judah rejoiced
because of thy judgments O lord.
for thou lord art high above all the earth thou art exalted
far above all gods.
ye that love the lord hate evil he preserveth the souls of
his saints he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.
light is sown for the righteous and gladness for the upright
in heart.
rejoice in the lord ye righteous and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness.
O sing unto the lord a new song for he hath done marvellous
things his right hand and his holy arm hath gotten him the
victory.
the lord hath made known his salvation his righteousness hath
he openly shewed in the sight of the heathen.
he hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of
Israel all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of
our God.
make a joyful noise unto the lord all the earth make a loud
noise and rejoice and sing praise.
sing unto the lord with the harp with the harp and the voice
of a psalm.
with trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before
the lord the king.
let the sea roar and the fulness thereof the world and they
that dwell therein.
let the floods clap their hands let the hills be joyful
together
before the lord for he cometh to judge the earth with
righteousness shall he judge the world and the people with
equity.
the lord reigneth let the people tremble he sitteth between
the Cherubims let the earth be moved.
the lord is great in Zion and he is high above all the
people.
let them praise thy great and terrible name for it is holy.
the king s strength also loveth judgment thou dost establish
equity thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.
exalt ye the lord our God and worship at his footstool for
he is holy.
Moses and Aaron among his priests and Samuel among them that
call upon his name they called upon the lord and he answered
them.
he spake unto them in the cloudy pillar they kept his
testimonies and the ordinance that he gave them.
thou answeredst them O lord our God thou wast a God that
forgavest them though thou tookest vengeance of their
inventions.
exalt the lord our God and worship at his holy hill for the
lord our God is holy.
make a joyful noise unto the lord all ye lands.
serve the lord with gladness come before his presence with
singing.
know ye that the lord he is God it is he that hath made us
and not we ourselves we are his people and the sheep of his
pasture.
enter into his gates with thanksgiving and into his courts
with praise be thankful unto him and bless his name.
for the lord is good his mercy is everlasting and his truth
endureth to all generations.
I will sing of mercy and judgment unto thee O lord will I
sing.
I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. O when wilt thou
come unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect
heart.
I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes I hate the work
of them that turn aside it shall not cleave to me.
a froward heart shall depart from me I will not know a wicked
person.
whoso privily slandereth his neighbour him will I cut off
him that hath an high look and a proud heart will not I
suffer.
mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land that they
may dwell with me he that walketh in a perfect way he shall
serve me.
he that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house he
that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight.
I will early destroy all the wicked of the land that I may
cut off all wicked doers from the city of the lord.
hear my prayer O lord and let my cry come unto thee.
hide not thy face from me in the day when I Am in trouble
incline thine ear unto me in the day when I call answer me
speedily.
for my days are consumed like smoke and my bones are burned
as an hearth.
my heart is smitten and withered like grass so that I forget
to eat my bread.
by reason of the voice of my groaning my bones cleave to my
skin.
I Am like a pelican of the wilderness I Am like an owl of the
desert.
I watch and Am as a sparrow alone upon the house top.
mine enemies reproach me all the day and they that are mad
against me are sworn against me.
for I have eaten ashes like bread and mingled my drink with
weeping.
because of thine indignation and thy wrath for thou hast
lifted me up and cast me down.
my days are like a shadow that declineth and I Am withered
like grass.
but thou O lord shall endure for ever and thy remembrance
unto all generations.
thou shalt Arise and have mercy upon Zion for the time to
favour her yea the set time is come.
for thy servants take pleasure in her stones and favour the
dust thereof.
so the heathen shall fear the name of the lord and all the
kings of the earth thy glory.
when the lord shall build up Zion he shall appear in his
glory.
he will regard the prayer of the destitute and not despise
their prayer.
this shall be written for the generation to come and the
people which shall be created shall praise the lord.
for he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary from
heaven did the lord behold the earth
to hear the groaning of the prisoner to loose those that are
appointed to death
to declare the name of the lord in Zion and his praise in
Jerusalem
when the people are gathered together and the kingdoms to
serve the lord.
he weakened my strength in the way he shortened my days.
I said O my God take me not away in the midst of my days
thy years are throughout all generations.
of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth and the
heavens are the work of thy hands.
they shall perish but thou shalt endure yea all of them
shall wax old like a garment as a vesture shalt thou change
them and they shall be changed
but thou art the same and thy years shall have no end.
the children of thy servants shall continue and their seed
shall be established before thee.
bless the lord O my soul and all that is within me bless
his holy name.
bless the lord O my soul and forget not all his benefits
who forgiveth all thine iniquities who healeth all thy
diseases
who redeemeth thy life from destruction who crowneth thee
with lovingkindness and tender mercies
who satisfieth thy mouth with good things so that thy youth
is renewed like the eagle s.
the lord executeth righteousness and judgment for all that are
oppressed.
he made known his ways unto Moses his acts unto the children
of Israel.
the lord is merciful and gracious slow to anger and
plenteous in mercy.
he will not always chide Neither will he keep his anger for
ever.
he hath not dealt with us after our sins nor rewarded us
according to our iniquities.
for as the heaven is high above the earth so great is his
mercy toward them that fear him.
as far as the east is from the west so far hath he removed
our transgressions from us.
like as a father pitieth his children so the lord pitieth
them that fear him.
for he knoweth our frame he remembereth that we are dust.
as for man his days are as grass as a flower of the field
so he flourisheth.
for the wind passeth over it and it is gone and the place
thereof shall know it no more.
but the mercy of the lord is from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him and his righteousness unto children s
children
to such as keep his covenant and to those that remember his
commandments to do them.
the lord hath prepared his throne in the heavens and his
kingdom ruleth over all.
bless the lord ye his angels that excel in strength that do
his commandments hearkening unto the voice of his word.
bless ye the lord all ye his hosts ye ministers of his that
do his pleasure.
bless the lord all his works in all places of his dominion
bless the lord O my soul.
bless the lord O my soul. O lord my God thou art very great
thou art clothed with honour and majesty.
who coverest thyself with light as with a garment who
stretchest out the heavens like a curtain
who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters who maketh
the clouds his chariot who walketh upon the wings of the
wind
who maketh his angels spirits his ministers a flaming fire
who laid the foundations of the earth that it should not be
removed for ever.
thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment the waters
stood above the mountains.
at thy rebuke they fled at the voice of thy thunder they
hasted away.
they go up by the mountains they go down by the valleys unto
the place which thou hast founded for them.
thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over that they
turn not again to cover the earth.
he sendeth the springs into the valleys which run among the
hills.
they give drink to every beast of the field the wild asses
quench their thirst.
by them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation
which sing among the branches.
he watereth the hills from his chambers the earth is
satisfied with the fruit of thy works.
he causeth the grass to grow for the cattle and herb for the
service of man that he may bring forth food out of the earth
and wine that maketh glad the heart of man and oil to make
his face to shine and bread which strengtheneth man s heart.
the trees of the lord are full of sap the cedars of Lebanon
which he hath planted
where the birds make their nests as for the stork the fir
trees are her house.
the high hills are a refuge for the wild goats and the rocks
for the conies.
he appointed the moon for seasons the sun knoweth his going
down.
thou makest darkness and it is night wherein all the beasts
of the forest do creep forth.
the young lions roar after their prey and seek their meat
from God.
the sun ariseth they gather themselves together and lay them
down in their dens.
man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the
evening.
O lord how manifold are thy works in wisdom hast thou made
them all the earth is full of thy Riches.
so is this great and wide sea wherein are things creeping
innumerable both small and great beasts.
there go the ships there is that leviathan whom thou hast
made to play therein.
these wait all upon thee that thou mayest give them their
meat in due season.
that thou givest them they gather thou openest thine hand
they are filled with good.
thou hidest thy face they are troubled thou takest away
their breath they die and return to their dust.
thou sendest forth thy spirit they are created and thou
renewest the face of the earth.
the glory of the lord shall endure for ever the lord shall
rejoice in his works.
he looketh on the earth and it trembleth he toucheth the
hills and they smoke.
I will sing unto the lord as long as I live I will sing
praise to my God while I have my being.
my meditation of him shall be sweet I will be glad in the
lord.
let the sinners be consumed out of the earth and let the
wicked be no more. bless thou the lord O my soul. praise ye
the lord.
O give thanks unto the lord call upon his name make known
his deeds among the people.
sing unto him sing psalms unto him talk ye of all his
wondrous works.
glory ye in his holy name let the heart of them rejoice that
seek the lord.
seek the lord and his strength seek his face evermore.
remember his marvellous works that he hath done his wonders
and the judgments of his mouth
O ye seed of Abraham his servant ye children of Jacob his
chosen.
he is the lord our God his judgments are in all the earth.
he hath remembered his covenant for ever the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations.
which covenant he made with Abraham and his oath unto Isaac
and confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law and to Israel for
an everlasting covenant
saying unto thee will I give the land of Canaan the Lot of
your inheritance
when they were but a few men in number yea very few and
strangers in it.
when they went from one nation to another from one kingdom to
another people
he suffered no man to do them wrong yea he reproved kings
for their sakes
saying touch not mine anointed and do my prophets no harm.
moreover he called for a famine upon the land he brake the
whole staff of bread.
he sent a man before them even Joseph who was sold for a
servant
whose feet they hurt with fetters he was laid in Iron
until the time that his word came the word of the lord tried
him.
the king sent and loosed him even the ruler of the people
and let him go free.
he made him lord of his house and ruler of all his substance
to bind his princes at his pleasure and teach his senators
wisdom.
Israel also came into Egypt and Jacob sojourned in the land
of Ham.
and he increased his people greatly and made them stronger
than their enemies.
he turned their heart to hate his people to deal subtilly
with his servants.
he sent Moses his servant and Aaron whom he had chosen.
they shewed his signs among them and wonders in the land of
Ham.
he sent darkness and made it dark and they rebelled not
against his word.
he turned their waters into blood and slew their fish.
their land brought forth frogs in abundance in the chambers
of their kings.
he spake and there came divers sorts of flies and lice in
all their coasts.
he gave them hail for rain and flaming fire in their land.
he smote their vines also and their fig trees and brake the
trees of their coasts.
he spake and the locusts came and caterpillers and that
without number
and did eat up all the herbs in their land and devoured the
fruit of their ground.
he smote also all the firstborn in their land the chief of
all their strength.
he brought them forth also with Silver and gold and there was
not one feeble person among their tribes.
Egypt was glad when they departed for the fear of them fell
upon them.
he spread a cloud for a covering and fire to give light in
the night.
the people asked and he brought quails and satisfied them
with the bread of heaven.
he opened the rock and the waters gushed out they ran in the
dry places like a river.
for he remembered his holy promise and Abraham his servant.
and he brought forth his people with joy and his chosen with
gladness
and gave them the lands of the heathen and they inherited the
labour of the people
that they might observe his statutes and keep his laws.
praise ye the lord.
praise ye the lord. O give thanks unto the lord for he is
good for his mercy endureth for ever.
who can utter the Mighty acts of the lord? who can shew forth
all his praise?
blessed are they that keep judgment and he that doeth
righteousness at all times.
remember me O lord with the favour that thou bearest unto
thy people O visit me with thy salvation
that I may see the good of thy chosen that I may rejoice in
the gladness of thy nation that I may glory with thine
inheritance.
we have sinned with our fathers we have committed iniquity
we have done wickedly.
our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt they
remembered not the multitude of thy mercies but provoked him
at the sea even at the red sea.
nevertheless he saved them for his name s sake that he might
make his Mighty power to be known.
he rebuked the red sea also and it was dried up so he led
them through the depths as through the wilderness.
and he saved them from the hand of him that hated them and
redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.
and the waters covered their enemies there was not one of
them left.
then believed they his words they sang his praise.
they soon forgat his works they waited not for his counsel
but lusted exceedingly in the wilderness and tempted God in
the desert.
and he gave them their request but sent leanness into their
soul.
they envied Moses also in the camp and Aaron the saint of the
lord.
the earth opened and swallowed up Dathan and covered the
company of Abiram.
and a fire was kindled in their company the flame burned up
the wicked.
they made a calf in Horeb and worshipped the molten image.
thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox
that eateth grass.
they forgat God their saviour which had done great things in
Egypt
wondrous works in the land of Ham and terrible things by the
red sea.
therefore he said that he would destroy them had not Moses
his chosen stood before him in the breach to turn away his
wrath lest he should destroy them.
yea they despised the pleasant land they believed not his
word
but murmured in their tents and hearkened not unto the voice
of the lord.
therefore he lifted up his hand against them to overthrow
them in the wilderness
to overthrow their seed also among the nations and to scatter
them in the lands.
they joined themselves also unto Baalpeor and ate the
sacrifices of the dead.
thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions and the
plague brake in upon them.
then stood up Phinehas and executed judgment and so the
plague was stayed.
and that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all
generations for evermore.
they angered him also at the waters of strife so that it went
ill with Moses for their sakes
because they provoked his spirit so that he spake unadvisedly
with his lips.
they did not destroy the nations concerning whom the lord
commanded them
but were mingled among the heathen and learned their works.
and they served their idols which were a snare unto them.
yea they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto
devils
and shed innocent blood even the blood of their sons and of
their daughters whom they sacrificed unto the idols of
Canaan and the land was polluted with blood.
thus were they defiled with their own works and went a
whoring with their own inventions.
therefore was the wrath of the lord kindled against his
people insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance.
and he gave them into the hand of the heathen and they that
hated them ruled over them.
their enemies also oppressed them and they were brought into
subjection under their hand.
many times did he deliver them but they provoked him with
their counsel and were brought low for their iniquity.
nevertheless he regarded their affliction when he heard their
cry
and he remembered for them his covenant and repented
according to the multitude of his mercies.
he made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them
captives.
save us O lord our God and gather us from among the heathen
to give thanks unto thy holy name and to triumph in thy
praise.
blessed be the lord God of Israel from everlasting to
everlasting and let all the people say Amen. praise ye the
lord.
O give thanks unto the lord for he is good for his mercy
endureth for ever.
let the redeemed of the lord say so whom he hath redeemed
from the hand of the enemy
and gathered them out of the lands from the east and from
the west from the north and from the south.
they wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way they found
no city to dwell in.
hungry and thirsty their soul fainted in them.
then they cried unto the lord in their trouble and he
delivered them out of their distresses.
and he led them forth by the right way that they might go to
a city of habitation.
oh that men would praise the lord for his goodness and for
his wonderful works to the children of men
for he satisfieth the longing soul and filleth the hungry
soul with goodness.
such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death being
bound in affliction and Iron
because they rebelled against the words of God and contemned
the counsel of the most high
therefore he brought down their heart with labour they fell
down and there was none to help.
then they cried unto the lord in their trouble and he saved
them out of their distresses.
he brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death and
brake their Bands in sunder.
oh that men would praise the lord for his goodness and for
his wonderful works to the children of men
for he hath broken the gates of brass and cut the bars of
Iron in sunder.
fools because of their transgression and because of their
iniquities are afflicted.
their soul abhorreth all manner of meat and they draw near
unto the gates of death.
then they cry unto the lord in their trouble and he saveth
them out of their distresses.
he sent his word and healed them and delivered them from
their destructions.
oh that men would praise the lord for his goodness and for
his wonderful works to the children of men
and let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving and
declare his works with rejoicing.
they that go down to the sea in ships that do business in
great waters
these see the works of the lord and his wonders in the deep.
for he commandeth and raiseth the stormy wind which lifteth
up the waves thereof.
they mount up to the heaven they go down again to the depths
their soul is melted because of trouble.
they reel to and fro and stagger like a drunken man and are
at their wit s end.
then they cry unto the lord in their trouble and he bringeth
them out of their distresses.
he maketh the storm a calm so that the waves thereof are
still.
then are they glad because they be quiet so he bringeth them
unto their desired haven.
oh that men would praise the lord for his goodness and for
his wonderful works to the children of men
let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people and
praise him in the assembly of the elders.
he turneth rivers into a wilderness and the watersprings into
dry ground
a fruitful land into barrenness for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein.
he turneth the wilderness into a standing water and dry
ground into watersprings.
and there he maketh the hungry to dwell that they may prepare
a city for habitation
and sow the fields and plant vineyards which may yield
fruits of increase.
he blesseth them also so that they are multiplied greatly
and suffereth not their cattle to decrease.
again they are minished and brought low through oppression
affliction and sorrow.
he poureth contempt upon princes and causeth them to wander
in the wilderness where there is no way.
yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction and maketh
him families like a flock.
the righteous shall see it and rejoice and all iniquity
shall stop her mouth.
whoso is wise and will observe these things even they shall
understand the lovingkindness of the lord.
O God my heart is fixed I will sing and give praise even
with my glory.
awake psaltery and harp I myself will awake early.
I will praise thee O lord among the people and I will sing
praises unto thee among the nations.
for thy mercy is great above the heavens and thy truth
reacheth unto the clouds.
be thou exalted O God above the heavens and thy glory above
all the earth
that thy beloved may be delivered save with thy right hand
and answer me.
God hath spoken in his holiness I will rejoice I will divide
Shechem and mete out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine Manasseh is mine Ephraim also is the strength
of mine head Judah is my lawgiver
Moab is my washpot over Edom will I cast out my shoe over
Philistia will I triumph.
who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into
Edom?
wilt not thou O God who hast cast us off? and wilt not thou
O God go forth with our hosts?
give us help from trouble for vain is the help of man.
through God we shall do valiantly for he it is that shall
tread down our enemies.
hold not thy peace O God of my praise
for the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are
opened against me they have spoken against me with a lying
tongue.
they compassed me about also with words of hatred and fought
against me without a cause.
for my love they are my adversaries but I give myself unto
prayer.
and they have rewarded me evil for good and hatred for my
love.
set thou a wicked man over him and let Satan stand at his
right hand.
when he shall be judged let him be condemned and let his
prayer become Sin.
let his days be few and let another take his office.
let his children be fatherless and his wife a widow.
let his children be continually vagabonds and beg let them
seek their bread also out of their desolate places.
let the extortioner catch all that he hath and let the
strangers spoil his labour.
let there be none to extend mercy unto him Neither let there
be any to favour his fatherless children.
let his posterity be cut off and in the generation following
let their name be blotted out.
let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the lord
and let not the Sin of his mother be blotted out.
let them be before the lord continually that he may cut off
the memory of them from the earth.
because that he remembered not to shew mercy but persecuted
the poor and needy man that he might even slay the broken in
heart.
as he loved cursing so let it come unto him as he delighted
not in blessing so let it be far from him.
as he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment
so let it come into his bowels like water and like oil into
his bones.
let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him and for
a girdle wherewith he is girded continually.
let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the lord and
of them that speak evil against my soul.
but do thou for me O God the lord for thy name s sake
because thy mercy is good deliver thou me.
for I Am poor and needy and my heart is wounded within me.
I Am gone like the shadow when it declineth I Am tossed up
and down as the locust.
my knees are weak through fasting and my flesh faileth of
fatness.
I became also a reproach unto them when they looked upon me
they shaked their heads.
help me O lord my God O save me according to thy mercy
that they may know that this is thy hand that thou lord
hast done it.
let them curse but bless thou when they Arise let them be
ashamed but let thy servant rejoice.
let mine adversaries be clothed with shame and let them cover
themselves with their own confusion as with a mantle.
I will greatly praise the lord with my mouth yea I will
praise him among the multitude.
for he shall stand at the right hand of the poor to save him
from those that condemn his soul.
the lord said unto my lord sit thou at my right hand until I
make thine enemies thy footstool.
the lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion rule
thou in the midst of thine enemies.
thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power in the
beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning thou hast
the dew of thy youth.
the lord hath sworn and will not repent thou art a priest
for ever after the order of Melchizedek.
the lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the
day of his wrath.
he shall judge among the heathen he shall fill the places
with the dead bodies he shall wound the heads over many
countries.
he shall drink of the brook in the way therefore shall he
lift up the head.
praise ye the lord. I will praise the lord with my whole
heart in the assembly of the upright and in the
congregation.
the works of the lord are great sought out of all them that
have pleasure therein.
his work is honourable and glorious and his righteousness
endureth for ever.
he hath made his wonderful works to be remembered the lord is
gracious and full of compassion.
he hath given meat unto them that fear him he will ever be
mindful of his covenant.
he hath shewed his people the power of his works that he may
give them the heritage of the heathen.
the works of his hands are verity and judgment all his
commandments are sure.
they stand fast for ever and ever and are done in truth and
uprightness.
he sent redemption unto his people he hath commanded his
covenant for ever holy and reverend is his name.
the fear of the lord is the beginning of wisdom a good
understanding have all they that do his commandments his
praise endureth for ever.
praise ye the lord. blessed is the man that feareth the lord
that delighteth greatly in his commandments.
his seed shall be Mighty upon earth the generation of the
upright shall be blessed.
wealth and Riches shall be in his house and his righteousness
endureth for ever.
unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness he is
gracious and full of compassion and righteous.
a good man sheweth favour and lendeth he will guide his
affairs with discretion.
surely he shall not be moved for ever the righteous shall be
in everlasting remembrance.
he shall not be afraid of evil tidings his heart is fixed
trusting in the lord.
his heart is established he shall not be afraid until he see
his desire upon his enemies.
he hath dispersed he hath given to the poor his
righteousness endureth for ever his horn shall be exalted
with honour.
the wicked shall see it and be grieved he shall gnash with
his teeth and melt away the desire of the wicked shall
perish.
praise ye the lord. praise O ye servants of the lord praise
the name of the lord.
blessed be the name of the lord from this time forth and for
evermore.
from the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same the
lord s name is to be praised.
the lord is high above all nations and his glory above the
heavens.
who is like unto the lord our God who dwelleth on high
who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven
and in the earth
he raiseth up the poor out of the dust and lifteth the needy
out of the dunghill
that he may set him with princes even with the princes of his
people.
he maketh the barren woman to keep house and to be a joyful
mother of children. praise ye the lord.
when Israel went out of Egypt the house of Jacob from a
people of strange language
Judah was his sanctuary and Israel his dominion.
the sea saw it and fled Jordan was driven back.
the mountains skipped like rams and the little hills like
lambs.
what ailed thee O thou sea that thou fleddest? thou Jordan
that thou wast driven back?
ye mountains that ye skipped like rams and ye little hills
like lambs?
tremble thou earth at the presence of the lord at the
presence of the God of Jacob
which turned the rock into a standing water the flint into a
fountain of waters.
not unto us O lord not unto us but unto thy name give
glory for thy mercy and for thy truth s sake.
wherefore should the heathen say where is now their God?
but our God is in the heavens he hath done whatsoever he hath
pleased.
their idols are Silver and gold the work of men s hands.
they have mouths but they speak not eyes have they but they
see not
they have ears but they hear not noses have they but they
smell not
they have hands but they handle not feet have they but they
walk not Neither speak they through their throat.
they that make them are like unto them so is every one that
trusteth in them.
O Israel trust thou in the lord he is their help and their
shield.
O house of Aaron trust in the lord he is their help and
their shield.
ye that fear the lord trust in the lord he is their help and
their shield.
the lord hath been mindful of us he will bless us he will
bless the house of Israel he will bless the house of Aaron.
he will bless them that fear the lord both small and great.
the lord shall increase you more and more you and your
children.
ye are blessed of the lord which made heaven and earth.
the heaven even the heavens are the lord s but the earth
hath he given to the children of men.
the dead praise not the lord Neither any that go down into
silence.
but we will bless the lord from this time forth and for
evermore. praise the lord.
I love the lord because he hath heard my voice and my
supplications.
because he hath inclined his ear unto me therefore will I
call upon him as long as I live.
the sorrows of death compassed me and the pains of hell gat
hold upon me I found trouble and sorrow.
then called I upon the name of the lord O lord I beseech
thee deliver my soul.
gracious is the lord and righteous yea our God is merciful.
the lord preserveth the simple I was brought low and he
helped me.
return unto thy rest O my soul for the lord hath dealt
bountifully with thee.
for thou hast delivered my soul from death mine eyes from
tears and my feet from falling.
I will walk before the lord in the land of the living.
I believed therefore have I spoken I was greatly afflicted
I said in my haste all men are liars.
what shall I render unto the lord for all his benefits toward
me?
I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name of
the lord.
I will pay my vows unto the lord now in the presence of all
his people.
precious in the sight of the lord is the death of his saints.
O lord truly I Am thy servant I Am thy servant and the son
of thine handmaid thou hast loosed my bonds.
I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving and will
call upon the name of the lord.
I will pay my vows unto the lord now in the presence of all
his people.
in the courts of the lord s house in the midst of thee O
Jerusalem. praise ye the lord.
O praise the lord all ye nations praise him all ye people.
for his merciful kindness is great toward us and the truth of
the lord endureth for ever. praise ye the lord.
O give thanks unto the lord for he is good because his mercy
endureth for ever.
let Israel now say that his mercy endureth for ever.
let the house of Aaron now say that his mercy endureth for
ever.
let them now that fear the lord say that his mercy endureth
for ever.
I called upon the lord in distress the lord answered me and
set me in a large place.
the lord is on my side I will not fear what can man do unto
me?
the lord taketh my part with them that help me therefore
shall I see my desire upon them that hate me.
it is better to trust in the lord than to put confidence in
man.
it is better to trust in the lord than to put confidence in
princes.
all nations compassed me about but in the name of the lord
will I destroy them.
they compassed me about yea they compassed me about but in
the name of the lord I will destroy them.
they compassed me about like bees they are quenched as the
fire of thorns for in the name of the lord I will destroy
them.
thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall but the lord
helped me.
the lord is my strength and song and is become my salvation.
the voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of
the righteous the right hand of the lord doeth valiantly.
the right hand of the lord is exalted the right hand of the
lord doeth valiantly.
I shall not die but live and declare the works of the lord.
the lord hath chastened me sore but he hath not given me over
unto death.
open to me the gates of righteousness I will go into them
and I will praise the lord
this gate of the lord into which the righteous shall enter.
I will praise thee for thou hast heard me and art become my
salvation.
the stone which the builders refused is become the head stone
of the corner.
this is the lord s doing it is marvellous in our eyes.
this is the day which the lord hath made we will rejoice and
be glad in it.
save now I beseech thee O lord O lord I beseech thee send
now prosperity.
blessed be he that cometh in the name of the lord we have
blessed you out of the house of the lord.
God is the lord which hath shewed us light bind the
sacrifice with cords even unto the horns of the altar.
thou art my God and I will praise thee thou art my God I
will exalt thee.
O give thanks unto the lord for he is good for his mercy
endureth for ever.
blessed are the undefiled in the way who walk in the law of
the lord.
blessed are they that keep his testimonies and that seek him
with the whole heart.
they also do no iniquity they walk in his ways.
thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.
O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes
then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy
commandments.
I will praise thee with uprightness of heart when I shall
have learned thy righteous judgments.
I will keep thy statutes O forsake me not utterly.
wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed
thereto according to thy word.
with my whole heart have I sought thee O let me not wander
from thy commandments.
thy word have I hid in mine heart that I might not Sin
against thee.
blessed art thou O lord teach me thy statutes.
with my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.
I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies as Much as in
all Riches.
I will meditate in thy precepts and have respect unto thy
ways.
I will delight myself in thy statutes I will not forget thy
word.
deal bountifully with thy servant that I may live and keep
thy word.
open thou mine eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of
thy law.
I Am a stranger in the earth hide not thy commandments from
me.
my soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy
judgments at all times.
thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed which do err from
thy commandments.
remove from me reproach and contempt for I have kept thy
testimonies.
princes also did sit and speak against me but thy servant did
meditate in thy statutes.
thy testimonies also are my delight and my counsellors.
my soul cleaveth unto the dust quicken thou me according to
thy word.
I have declared my ways and thou heardest me teach me thy
statutes.
make me to understand the way of thy precepts so shall I talk
of thy wondrous works.
my soul melteth for heaviness strengthen thou me according
unto thy word.
remove from me the way of lying and grant me thy law
graciously.
I have chosen the way of truth thy judgments have I laid
before me.
I have stuck unto thy testimonies O lord put me not to
shame.
I will run the way of thy commandments when thou shalt
enlarge my heart.
teach me O lord the way of thy statutes and I shall keep it
unto the end.
give me understanding and I shall keep thy law yea I shall
observe it with my whole heart.
make me to go in the path of thy commandments for therein do
I delight.
incline my heart unto thy testimonies and not to
covetousness.
turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity and quicken thou me
in thy way.
stablish thy word unto thy servant who is devoted to thy
fear.
turn away my reproach which I fear for thy judgments are
good.
behold I have longed after thy precepts quicken me in thy
righteousness.
let thy mercies come also unto me O lord even thy salvation
according to thy word.
so shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me
for I trust in thy word.
and take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth for I
have hoped in thy judgments.
so shall I keep thy law continually for ever and ever.
and I will walk at liberty for I seek thy precepts.
I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings and will
not be ashamed.
and I will delight myself in thy commandments which I have
loved.
my hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments which I
have loved and I will meditate in thy statutes.
remember the word unto thy servant upon which thou hast
caused me to hope.
this is my comfort in my affliction for thy word hath
quickened me.
the proud have had me greatly in derision yet have I not
declined from thy law.
I remembered thy judgments of old O lord and have comforted
myself.
horror hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked that
forsake thy law.
thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.
I have remembered thy name O lord in the night and have
kept thy law.
this I had because I kept thy precepts.
thou art my portion O lord I have said that I would keep thy
words.
I intreated thy favour with my whole heart be merciful unto
me according to thy word.
I thought on my ways and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
I made haste and delayed not to keep thy commandments.
the Bands of the wicked have robbed me but I have not
forgotten thy law.
at midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because of
thy righteous judgments.
I Am a companion of all them that fear thee and of them that
keep thy precepts.
the earth O lord is full of thy mercy teach me thy
statutes.
thou hast dealt well with thy servant O lord according unto
thy word.
teach me good judgment and knowledge for I have believed thy
commandments.
before I was afflicted I went astray but now have I kept thy
word.
thou art good and doest good teach me thy statutes.
the proud have forged a lie against me but I will keep thy
precepts with my whole heart.
their heart is as fat as grease but I delight in thy law.
it is good for me that I have been afflicted that I might
learn thy statutes.
the law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold
and Silver.
thy hands have made me and fashioned me give me
understanding that I may learn thy commandments.
they that fear thee will be glad when they see me because I
have hoped in thy word.
I know O lord that thy judgments are right and that thou in
faithfulness hast afflicted me.
let I pray thee thy merciful kindness be for my comfort
according to thy word unto thy servant.
let thy tender mercies come unto me that I may live for thy
law is my delight.
let the proud be ashamed for they dealt perversely with me
without a cause but I will meditate in thy precepts.
let those that fear thee turn unto me and those that have
known thy testimonies.
let my heart be sound in thy statutes that I be not ashamed.
my soul fainteth for thy salvation but I hope in thy word.
mine eyes fail for thy word saying when wilt thou comfort
me?
for I Am become like a bottle in the smoke yet do I not
forget thy statutes.
how many are the days of thy servant? when wilt thou execute
judgment on them that persecute me?
the proud have digged pits for me which are not after thy
law.
all thy commandments are faithful they persecute me
wrongfully help thou me.
they had almost consumed me upon earth but I forsook not thy
precepts.
quicken me after thy lovingkindness so shall I keep the
testimony of thy mouth.
for ever O lord thy word is settled in heaven.
thy faithfulness is unto all generations thou hast
established the earth and it abideth.
they continue this day according to thine ordinances for all
are thy servants.
unless thy law had been my delights I should then have
perished in mine affliction.
I will never forget thy precepts for with them thou hast
quickened me.
I Am thine save me for I have sought thy precepts.
the wicked have waited for me to destroy me but I will
consider thy testimonies.
I have seen an end of all perfection but thy commandment is
exceeding broad.
O how I love thy law it is my meditation all the day.
thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser than mine
enemies for they are ever with me.
I have more understanding than all my teachers for thy
testimonies are my meditation.
I understand more than the ancients because I keep thy
precepts.
I have refrained my feet from every evil way that I might
keep thy word.
I have not departed from thy judgments for thou hast taught
me.
how sweet are thy words unto my taste yea sweeter than honey
to my mouth
through thy precepts I get understanding therefore I hate
every false way.
thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a light unto my path.
I have sworn and I will perform it that I will keep thy
righteous judgments.
I Am afflicted very Much quicken me O lord according unto
thy word.
accept I beseech thee the freewill offerings of my mouth O
lord and teach me thy judgments.
my soul is continually in my hand yet do I not forget thy
law.
the wicked have laid a snare for me yet I erred not from thy
precepts.
thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever for they
are the rejoicing of my heart.
I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway even
unto the end.
I hate vain thoughts but thy law do I love.
thou art my hiding place and my shield I hope in thy word.
depart from me ye evildoers for I will keep the commandments
of my God.
uphold me according unto thy word that I may live and let me
not be ashamed of my hope.
hold thou me up and I shall be safe and I will have respect
unto thy statutes continually.
thou hast trodden down all them that err from thy statutes
for their deceit is falsehood.
thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross
therefore I love thy testimonies.
my flesh trembleth for fear of thee and I Am afraid of thy
judgments.
I have done judgment and justice leave me not to mine
oppressors.
be surety for thy servant for good let not the proud oppress
me.
mine eyes fail for thy salvation and for the word of thy
righteousness.
deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy and teach me
thy statutes.
I Am thy servant give me understanding that I may know thy
testimonies.
it is time for thee lord to work for they have made void
thy law.
therefore I love thy commandments above gold yea above fine
gold.
therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to
be right and I hate every false way.
thy testimonies are wonderful therefore doth my soul keep
them.
the entrance of thy words giveth light it giveth
understanding unto the simple.
I opened my mouth and panted for I longed for thy
commandments.
look thou upon me and be merciful unto me as thou usest to
do unto those that love thy name.
order my steps in thy word and let not any iniquity have
dominion over me.
deliver me from the oppression of man so will I keep thy
precepts.
make thy face to shine upon thy servant and teach me thy
statutes.
rivers of waters run down mine eyes because they keep not thy
law.
righteous art thou O lord and upright are thy judgments.
thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous and
very faithful.
my zeal hath consumed me because mine enemies have forgotten
thy words.
thy word is very pure therefore thy servant loveth it.
I Am small and despised yet do not I forget thy precepts.
thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness and thy law
is the truth.
trouble and anguish have taken hold on me yet thy
commandments are my delights.
the righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting give me
understanding and I shall live.
I cried with my whole heart hear me O lord I will keep thy
statutes.
I cried unto thee save me and I shall keep thy testimonies.
I prevented the dawning of the morning and cried I hoped in
thy word.
mine eyes prevent the night watches that I might meditate in
thy word.
hear my voice according unto thy lovingkindness O lord
quicken me according to thy judgment.
they draw nigh that follow after mischief they are far from
thy law.
thou art near O lord and all thy commandments are truth.
concerning thy testimonies I have known of old that thou hast
founded them for ever.
consider mine affliction and deliver me for I do not forget
thy law.
plead my cause and deliver me quicken me according to thy
word.
salvation is far from the wicked for they seek not thy
statutes.
great are thy tender mercies O lord quicken me according to
thy judgments.
many are my persecutors and mine enemies yet do I not decline
from thy testimonies.
I beheld the transgressors and was grieved because they kept
not thy word.
consider how I love thy precepts quicken me O lord
according to thy lovingkindness.
thy word is true from the beginning and every one of thy
righteous judgments endureth for ever.
princes have persecuted me without a cause but my heart
standeth in awe of thy word.
I rejoice at thy word as one that findeth great spoil.
I hate and abhor lying but thy law do I love.
seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous
judgments.
great peace have they which love thy law and nothing shall
offend them.
lord I have hoped for thy salvation and done thy
commandments.
my soul hath kept thy testimonies and I love them
exceedingly.
I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies for all my ways
are before thee.
let my cry come near before thee O lord give me
understanding according to thy word.
let my supplication come before thee deliver me according to
thy word.
my lips shall utter praise when thou hast taught me thy
statutes.
my tongue shall speak of thy word for all thy commandments
are righteousness.
let thine hand help me for I have chosen thy precepts.
I have longed for thy salvation O lord and thy law is my
delight.
let my soul live and it shall praise thee and let thy
judgments help me.
I have gone astray like a lost sheep seek thy servant for I
do not forget thy commandments.
in my distress I cried unto the lord and he heard me.
deliver my soul O lord from lying lips and from a deceitful
tongue.
what shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto
thee thou false tongue?
Sharp arrows of the Mighty with coals of juniper.
woe is me that I Sojourn in Mesech that I dwell in the tents
of Kedar
my soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace.
I Am for peace but when I speak they are for war.
I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills from whence cometh my
help.
my help cometh from the lord which made heaven and earth.
he will not suffer thy foot to be moved he that keepeth thee
will not slumber.
behold he that keepeth Israel shall Neither slumber nor
sleep.
the lord is thy keeper the lord is thy shade upon thy right
hand.
the sun shall not smite thee by day nor the moon by night.
the lord shall preserve thee from all evil he shall preserve
thy soul.
the lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from
this time forth and even for evermore.
I was glad when they said unto me let us go into the house of
the lord.
our feet shall stand within thy gates O Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together
whither the tribes go up the tribes of the lord unto the
testimony of Israel to give thanks unto the name of the lord.
for there are set thrones of judgment the thrones of the
house of David.
pray for the peace of Jerusalem they shall prosper that love
thee.
peace be within thy walls and prosperity within thy palaces.
for my brethren and companions sakes I will now say peace
be within thee.
because of the house of the lord our God I will seek thy good.
unto thee lift I up mine eyes O thou that dwellest in the
heavens.
behold as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their
masters and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her
mistress so our eyes wait upon the lord our God until that
he have mercy upon us.
have mercy upon us O lord have mercy upon us for we are
exceedingly filled with contempt.
our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that
are at ease and with the contempt of the proud.
if it had not been the lord who was on our side now may
Israel say
if it had not been the lord who was on our side when men rose
up against us
then they had swallowed us up quick when their wrath was
kindled against us
then the waters had overwhelmed us the stream had gone over
our soul
then the proud waters had gone over our soul.
blessed be the lord who hath not given us as a prey to their
teeth.
our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers
the snare is broken and we are escaped.
our help is in the name of the lord who made heaven and
earth.
they that trust in the lord shall be as mount Zion which
cannot be removed but abideth for ever.
as the mountains are round about Jerusalem so the lord is
round about his people from henceforth even for ever.
for the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the Lot of the
righteous lest the righteous put forth their hands unto
iniquity.
do good O lord unto those that be good and to them that are
upright in their hearts.
as for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways the lord
shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity but peace
shall be upon Israel.
when the lord turned again the captivity of Zion we were like
them that dream.
then was our mouth filled with laughter and our tongue with
singing then said they among the heathen the lord hath done
great things for them.
the lord hath done great things for us whereof we are glad.
turn again our captivity O lord as the streams in the south.
they that sow in tears shall reap in joy.
he that goeth forth and weepeth bearing precious seed shall
doubtless come again with rejoicing bringing his sheaves with
him.
except the lord build the house they labour in vain that
build it except the lord keep the city the watchman waketh
but in vain.
it is vain for you to rise up early to sit up late to eat
the bread of sorrows for so he giveth his beloved sleep.
lo children are an heritage of the lord and the fruit of the
womb is his reward.
as arrows are in the hand of a Mighty man so are children of
the youth.
happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them they shall
not be ashamed but they shall speak with the enemies in the
gate.
blessed is every one that feareth the lord that walketh in
his ways.
for thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands happy shalt thou
be and it shall be well with thee.
thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine
house thy children like olive plants round about thy table.
behold that thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the
lord.
the lord shall bless thee out of Zion and thou shalt see the
good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.
yea thou shalt see thy children s children and peace upon
Israel.
many a time have they afflicted me from my youth may Israel
now say
many a time have they afflicted me from my youth yet they
have not prevailed against me.
the plowers plowed upon my back they made long their furrows.
the lord is righteous he hath cut asunder the cords of the
wicked.
let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Zion.
let them be as the grass upon the housetops which withereth
afore it groweth up
wherewith the mower filleth not his hand nor he that bindeth
sheaves his bosom.
Neither do they which go by say the blessing of the lord be
upon you we bless you in the name of the lord.
out of the depths have I cried unto thee O lord.
lord hear my voice let thine ears be attentive to the voice
of my supplications.
if thou lord shouldest Mark iniquities O lord who shall
stand?
but there is forgiveness with thee that thou mayest be
feared.
I wait for the lord my soul doth wait and in his word do I
hope.
my soul waiteth for the lord more than they that watch for the
morning I say more than they that watch for the morning.
let Israel hope in the lord for with the lord there is mercy
and with him is plenteous redemption.
and he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
lord my heart is not haughty nor mine eyes lofty Neither do
I exercise myself in great matters or in things too high for
me.
surely I have behaved and quieted myself as a child that is
weaned of his mother my soul is even as a weaned child.
let Israel hope in the lord from henceforth and for ever.
lord remember David and all his afflictions
how he sware unto the lord and vowed unto the Mighty God of
Jacob
surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house nor go
up into my bed
I will not give sleep to mine eyes or slumber to mine
eyelids
until I find out a place for the lord an habitation for the
Mighty God of Jacob.
lo we heard of it at Ephratah we found it in the fields of
the wood.
we will go into his tabernacles we will worship at his
footstool.
Arise O lord into thy rest thou and the ark of thy
strength.
let thy priests be clothed with righteousness and let thy
saints shout for joy.
for thy servant David s sake turn not away the face of thine
anointed.
the lord hath sworn in truth unto David he will not turn from
it of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.
if thy children will keep my covenant and my testimony that I
shall teach them their children shall also sit upon thy
throne for evermore.
for the lord hath chosen Zion he hath desired it for his
habitation.
this is my rest for ever here will I dwell for I have
desired it.
I will abundantly bless her provision I will satisfy her poor
with bread.
I will also clothe her priests with salvation and her saints
shall shout aloud for joy.
there will I make the horn of David to bud I have ordained a
lamp for mine anointed.
his enemies will I clothe with shame but upon himself shall
his crown flourish.
behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity
it is like the precious ointment upon the head that ran down
upon the beard even Aaron s beard that went down to the
skirts of his garments
as the dew of Hermon and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of Zion for there the lord commanded the blessing
even life for evermore.
behold bless ye the lord all ye servants of the lord which
by night stand in the house of the lord.
lift up your hands in the sanctuary and bless the lord.
the lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion.
praise ye the lord. praise ye the name of the lord praise
him O ye servants of the lord.
ye that stand in the house of the lord in the courts of the
house of our God.
praise the lord for the lord is good sing praises unto his
name for it is pleasant.
for the lord hath chosen Jacob unto himself and Israel for
his peculiar treasure.
for I know that the lord is great and that our lord is above
all gods.
whatsoever the lord pleased that did he in heaven and in
earth in the seas and all deep places.
he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth
he maketh lightnings for the rain he bringeth the wind out of
his treasuries.
who smote the firstborn of Egypt both of man and beast.
who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee O Egypt
upon Pharaoh and upon all his servants.
who smote great nations and slew Mighty kings
Sihon king of the Amorites and Og king of Bashan and all the
kingdoms of Canaan
and gave their land for an heritage an heritage unto Israel
his people.
thy name O lord endureth for ever and thy memorial O lord
throughout all generations.
for the lord will judge his people and he will repent himself
concerning his servants.
the idols of the heathen are Silver and gold the work of
men s hands.
they have mouths but they speak not eyes have they but they
see not
they have ears but they hear not Neither is there any breath
in their mouths.
they that make them are like unto them so is every one that
trusteth in them.
bless the lord O house of Israel bless the lord O house of
Aaron
bless the lord O house of Levi ye that fear the lord bless
the lord.
blessed be the lord out of Zion which dwelleth at Jerusalem.
praise ye the lord.
O give thanks unto the lord for he is good for his mercy
endureth for ever.
O give thanks unto the God of gods for his mercy endureth for
ever.
O give thanks to the lord of lords for his mercy endureth for
ever.
to him who alone doeth great wonders for his mercy endureth
for ever.
to him that by wisdom made the heavens for his mercy endureth
for ever.
to him that stretched out the earth above the waters for his
mercy endureth for ever.
to him that made great lights for his mercy endureth for
ever
the sun to rule by day for his mercy endureth for ever
the moon and stars to rule by night for his mercy endureth
for ever.
to him that smote Egypt in their firstborn for his mercy
endureth for ever
and brought out Israel from among them for his mercy endureth
for ever
with a strong hand and with a stretched out arm for his
mercy endureth for ever.
to him which divided the red sea into parts for his mercy
endureth for ever
and made Israel to pass through the midst of it for his mercy
endureth for ever
but overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the red sea for his
mercy endureth for ever.
to him which led his people through the wilderness for his
mercy endureth for ever.
to him which smote great kings for his mercy endureth for
ever
and slew famous kings for his mercy endureth for ever
Sihon king of the Amorites for his mercy endureth for ever
and Og the king of Bashan for his mercy endureth for ever
and gave their land for an heritage for his mercy endureth
for ever
even an heritage unto Israel his servant for his mercy
endureth for ever.
who remembered us in our low estate for his mercy endureth
for ever
and hath redeemed us from our enemies for his mercy endureth
for ever.
who giveth food to all flesh for his mercy endureth for ever.
O give thanks unto the God of heaven for his mercy endureth
for ever.
by the rivers of Babylon there we sat down yea we wept
when we remembered Zion.
we hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.
for there they that carried us away captive required of us a
song and they that wasted us required of us mirth saying
sing us one of the songs of Zion.
how shall we sing the lord s song in a strange land?
if I forget thee O Jerusalem let my right hand forget her
cunning.
if I do not remember thee let my tongue cleave to the roof of
my mouth if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.
remember O lord the children of Edom in the day of
Jerusalem who said rase it rase it even to the foundation
thereof.
O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed happy shall he
be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us.
happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones
against the stones.
I will praise thee with my whole heart before the gods will I
sing praise unto thee.
I will worship toward thy holy temple and praise thy name for
thy lovingkindness and for thy truth for thou hast magnified
thy word above all thy name.
in the day when I cried thou answeredst me and strengthenedst
me with strength in my soul.
all the kings of the earth shall praise thee O lord when
they hear the words of thy mouth.
yea they shall sing in the ways of the lord for great is the
glory of the lord.
though the lord be high yet hath he respect unto the lowly
but the proud he knoweth afar off.
though I walk in the midst of trouble thou wilt revive me
thou shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine
enemies and thy right hand shall save me.
the lord will perfect that which concerneth me thy mercy O
lord endureth for ever forsake not the works of thine own
hands.
O lord thou hast searched me and known me.
thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising thou
understandest my thought afar off.
thou compassest my path and my lying down and art acquainted
with all my ways.
for there is not a word in my tongue but lo O lord thou
knowest it altogether.
thou hast beset me behind and before and laid thine hand upon
me.
such knowledge is too wonderful for me it is high I cannot
attain unto it.
whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee
from thy presence?
if I ascend up into heaven thou art there if I make my bed
in hell behold thou art there.
if I take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost
parts of the sea
even there shall thy hand lead me and thy right hand shall
hold me.
if I say surely the darkness shall cover me even the night
shall be light about me.
yea the darkness hideth not from thee but the night shineth
as the day the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.
for thou hast possessed my reins thou hast covered me in my
mother s womb.
I will praise thee for I Am fearfully and wonderfully made
marvellous are thy works and that my soul knoweth right well.
my substance was not hid from thee when I was made in secret
and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.
thine eyes did see my substance yet being unperfect and in
thy book all my members were written which in continuance
were fashioned when as yet there was none of them.
how precious also are thy thoughts unto me O God how great
is the sum of them
if I should count them they are more in number than the sand
when I awake I Am still with thee.
surely thou wilt slay the wicked O God depart from me
therefore ye bloody men.
for they speak against thee wickedly and thine enemies take
thy name in vain.
do not I hate them O lord that hate thee? and Am not I
grieved with those that rise up against thee?
I hate them with perfect hatred I count them mine enemies.
search me O God and know my heart try me and know my
thoughts
and see if there be any wicked way in me and lead me in the
way everlasting.
deliver me O lord from the evil man preserve me from the
violent man
which imagine mischiefs in their heart continually are they
gathered together for war.
they have sharpened their tongues like a serpent adders
poison is under their lips. Selah.
keep me O lord from the hands of the wicked preserve me
from the violent man who have purposed to overthrow my
goings.
the proud have hid a snare for me and cords they have spread
a net by the wayside they have set gins for me. Selah.
I said unto the lord thou art my God hear the voice of my
supplications O lord.
O God the lord the strength of my salvation thou hast
covered my head in the day of battle.
grant not O lord the desires of the wicked further not his
wicked device lest they exalt themselves. Selah.
as for the head of those that compass me about let the
mischief of their own lips cover them.
let burning coals fall upon them let them be cast into the
fire into deep pits that they rise not up again.
let not an evil speaker be established in the earth evil
shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him.
I know that the lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted
and the right of the poor.
surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name the
upright shall dwell in thy presence.
lord I cry unto thee make haste unto me give ear unto my
voice when I cry unto thee.
let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense and the
lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.
set a watch O lord before my mouth keep the door of my
lips.
incline not my heart to any evil thing to practise wicked
works with men that work iniquity and let me not eat of their
dainties.
let the righteous smite me it shall be a kindness and let
him reprove me it shall be an excellent oil which shall not
break my head for yet my prayer also shall be in their
calamities.
when their judges are overthrown in stony places they shall
hear my words for they are sweet.
our bones are scattered at the grave s mouth as when one
cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth.
but mine eyes are unto thee O God the lord in thee is my
trust leave not my soul destitute.
keep me from the snares which they have laid for me and the
gins of the workers of iniquity.
let the wicked fall into their own nets whilst that I withal
escape.
I cried unto the lord with my voice with my voice unto the
lord did I make my supplication.
I poured out my complaint before him I shewed before him my
trouble.
when my spirit was overwhelmed within me then thou knewest my
path. in the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a
snare for me.
I looked on my right hand and beheld but there was no man
that would know me refuge failed me no man cared for my
soul.
I cried unto thee O lord I said thou art my refuge and my
portion in the land of the living.
attend unto my cry for I Am brought very low deliver me from
my persecutors for they are stronger than I.
bring my soul out of prison that I may praise thy name the
righteous shall compass me about for thou shalt deal
bountifully with me.
hear my prayer O lord give ear to my supplications in thy
faithfulness answer me and in thy righteousness.
and enter not into judgment with thy servant for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified.
for the enemy hath persecuted my soul he hath smitten my life
down to the ground he hath made me to dwell in darkness as
those that have been long dead.
therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me my heart within
me is desolate.
I remember the days of old I meditate on all thy works I
muse on the work of thy hands.
I stretch forth my hands unto thee my soul thirsteth after
thee as a thirsty land. Selah.
hear me speedily O lord my spirit faileth hide not thy face
from me lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.
cause me to hear thy lovingkindness in the morning for in
thee do I trust cause me to know the way wherein I should
walk for I lift up my soul unto thee.
deliver me O lord from mine enemies I flee unto thee to
hide me.
teach me to do thy will for thou art my God thy spirit is
good lead me into the land of uprightness.
quicken me O lord for thy name s sake for thy
righteousness sake bring my soul out of trouble.
and of thy mercy cut off mine enemies and destroy all them
that afflict my soul for I Am thy servant.
blessed be the lord my strength which teacheth my hands to
war and my fingers to fight
my goodness and my fortress my high tower and my deliverer
my shield and he in whom I trust who subdueth my people
under me.
lord what is man that thou takest knowledge of him or the
son of man that thou makest account of him
man is like to vanity his days are as a shadow that passeth
away.
bow thy heavens O lord and come down touch the mountains
and they shall smoke.
cast forth lightning and scatter them shoot out thine
arrows and destroy them.
send thine hand from above rid me and deliver me out of
great waters from the hand of strange children
whose mouth speaketh vanity and their right hand is a right
hand of falsehood.
I will sing a new song unto thee O God upon a psaltery and
an instrument of Ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.
it is he that giveth salvation unto kings who delivereth
David his servant from the hurtful sword.
rid me and deliver me from the hand of strange children
whose mouth speaketh vanity and their right hand is a right
hand of falsehood
that our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth that
our daughters may be as corner stones polished after the
similitude of a palace
that our garners may be full affording all manner of store
that our sheep may bring forth thousands and Ten thousands in
our streets
that our oxen may be strong to labour that there be no
breaking in nor going out that there be no complaining in
our streets.
happy is that people that is in such a case yea happy is
that people whose God is the lord.
I will extol thee my God O king and I will bless thy name
for ever and ever.
every day will I bless thee and I will praise thy name for
ever and ever.
great is the lord and greatly to be praised and his
greatness is unsearchable.
one generation shall praise thy works to another and shall
declare thy Mighty acts.
I will speak of the glorious honour of thy majesty and of thy
wondrous works.
and men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts and I
will declare thy greatness.
they shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness
and shall sing of thy righteousness.
the lord is gracious and full of compassion slow to anger
and of great mercy.
the lord is good to all and his tender mercies are over all
his works.
all thy works shall praise thee O lord and thy saints shall
bless thee.
they shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom and talk of thy
power
to make known to the sons of men his Mighty acts and the
glorious majesty of his kingdom.
thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom and thy dominion
endureth throughout all generations.
the lord upholdeth all that fall and raiseth up all those
that be bowed down.
the eyes of all wait upon thee and thou givest them their
meat in due season.
thou openest thine hand and satisfiest the desire of every
living thing.
the lord is righteous in all his ways and holy in all his
works.
the lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him to all that
call upon him in truth.
he will fulfil the desire of them that fear him he also will
hear their cry and will save them.
the lord preserveth all them that love him but all the wicked
will he destroy.
my mouth shall speak the praise of the lord and let all flesh
bless his holy name for ever and ever.
praise ye the lord. praise the lord O my soul.
while I live will I praise the lord I will sing praises unto
my God while I have any being.
put not your trust in princes nor in the son of man in whom
there is no help.
his breath goeth forth he returneth to his earth in that
very day his thoughts perish.
happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help whose
hope is in the lord his God
which made heaven and earth the sea and all that therein
is which keepeth truth for ever
which executeth judgment for the oppressed which giveth food
to the hungry. the lord looseth the prisoners
the lord openeth the eyes of the blind the lord raiseth them
that are bowed down the lord loveth the righteous
the lord preserveth the strangers he relieveth the fatherless
and widow but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down.
the lord shall reign for ever even thy God O Zion unto all
generations. praise ye the lord.
praise ye the lord for it is good to sing praises unto our
God for it is pleasant and praise is comely.
the lord doth build up Jerusalem he gathereth together the
outcasts of Israel.
he healeth the broken in heart and bindeth up their wounds.
he telleth the number of the stars he calleth them all by
their names.
great is our lord and of great power his understanding is
infinite.
the lord lifteth up the meek he casteth the wicked down to
the ground.
sing unto the lord with thanksgiving sing praise upon the
harp unto our God
who covereth the heaven with clouds who prepareth rain for
the earth who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.
he giveth to the beast his food and to the young ravens which
cry.
he delighteth not in the strength of the horse he taketh not
pleasure in the legs of a man.
the lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him in those that
hope in his mercy.
praise the lord O Jerusalem praise thy God O Zion.
for he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates he hath
blessed thy children within thee.
he maketh peace in thy borders and filleth thee with the
finest of the wheat.
he sendeth forth his commandment upon earth his word runneth
very swiftly.
he giveth snow like wool he scattereth the hoarfrost like
ashes.
he casteth forth his ice like morsels who can stand before
his cold?
he sendeth out his word and melteth them he causeth his wind
to blow and the waters flow.
he sheweth his word unto Jacob his statutes and his judgments
unto Israel.
he hath not dealt so with any nation and as for his
judgments they have not known them. praise ye the lord.
praise ye the lord. praise ye the lord from the heavens
praise him in the heights.
praise ye him all his angels praise ye him all his hosts.
praise ye him sun and moon praise him all ye stars of
light.
praise him ye heavens of heavens and ye waters that be above
the heavens.
let them praise the name of the lord for he commanded and
they were created.
he hath also stablished them for ever and ever he hath made a
decree which shall not pass.
praise the lord from the earth ye dragons and all deeps
fire and hail snow and vapours stormy wind fulfilling his
word
mountains and all hills fruitful trees and all cedars
beasts and all cattle creeping things and flying fowl
kings of the earth and all people princes and all judges of
the earth
both young men and maidens old men and children
let them praise the name of the lord for his name alone is
excellent his glory is above the earth and heaven.
he also exalteth the horn of his people the praise of all his
saints even of the children of Israel a people near unto
him. praise ye the lord.
praise ye the lord. sing unto the lord a new song and his
praise in the congregation of saints.
let Israel rejoice in him that made him let the children of
Zion be joyful in their king.
let them praise his name in the dance let them sing praises
unto him with the timbrel and harp.
for the lord taketh pleasure in his people he will beautify
the meek with salvation.
let the saints be joyful in glory let them sing aloud upon
their beds.
let the high praises of God be in their mouth and a two-edged
sword in their hand
to execute vengeance upon the heathen and punishments upon
the people
to bind their kings with chains and their nobles with fetters
of Iron
to execute upon them the judgment written this honour have
all his saints. praise ye the lord.
praise ye the lord. praise God in his sanctuary praise him in
the firmament of his power.
praise him for his Mighty acts praise him according to his
excellent greatness.
praise him with the sound of the trumpet praise him with the
psaltery and harp.
praise him with the timbrel and dance praise him with
stringed instruments and organs.
praise him upon the loud cymbals praise him upon the high
sounding cymbals.
let every thing that hath breath praise the lord. praise ye
the lord.
the proverbs of Solomon the son of David king of Israel
to know wisdom and instruction to perceive the words of
understanding
to receive the instruction of wisdom justice and judgment
and equity
to give subtilty to the simple to the young man knowledge and
discretion.
a wise man will hear and will increase learning and a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsels
to understand a proverb and the interpretation the words of
the wise and their dark sayings.
the fear of the lord is the beginning of knowledge but fools
despise wisdom and instruction.
my son hear the instruction of thy father and forsake not
the law of thy mother
for they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head and
chains about thy neck.
my son if sinners entice thee consent thou not.
if they say come with us let us lay wait for blood let us
lurk privily for the innocent without cause
let us swallow them up alive as the grave and whole as those
that go down into the pit
we shall find all precious substance we shall fill our houses
with spoil
cast in thy Lot among us let us all have one purse
my son walk not thou in the way with them refrain thy foot
from their path
for their feet run to evil and make haste to shed blood.
surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.
and they lay wait for their own blood they lurk privily for
their own lives.
so are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain which
taketh away the life of the owners thereof.
wisdom crieth without she uttereth her voice in the streets
she crieth in the chief place of concourse in the openings of
the gates in the city she uttereth her words saying
how long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? and the
scorners delight in their scorning and fools hate knowledge?
turn you at my reproof behold I will pour out my spirit unto
you I will make known my words unto you.
because I have called and ye refused I have stretched out my
hand and no man regarded
but ye have set at nought all my counsel and would none of my
reproof
I also will laugh at your calamity I will mock when your fear
cometh
when your fear cometh as desolation and your destruction
cometh as a whirlwind when distress and anguish cometh upon
you.
then shall they call upon me but I will not answer they
shall seek me early but they shall not find me
for that they hated knowledge and did not choose the fear of
the lord
they would none of my counsel they despised all my reproof.
therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way and be
filled with their own devices.
for the turning away of the simple shall slay them and the
prosperity of fools shall destroy them.
but whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely and shall be
quiet from fear of evil.
my son if thou wilt receive my words and hide my
commandments with thee
so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom and apply thine
heart to understanding
yea if thou criest after knowledge and liftest up thy voice
for understanding
if thou seekest her as Silver and searchest for her as for
hid treasures
then shalt thou understand the fear of the lord and find the
knowledge of God.
for the lord giveth wisdom out of his mouth cometh knowledge
and understanding.
he layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous he is a buckler
to them that walk uprightly.
he keepeth the paths of judgment and preserveth the way of
his saints.
then shalt thou understand righteousness and judgment and
equity yea every good path.
when wisdom entereth into thine heart and knowledge is
pleasant unto thy soul
discretion shall preserve thee understanding shall keep thee
to deliver thee from the way of the evil man from the man
that speaketh froward things
who leave the paths of uprightness to walk in the ways of
darkness
who rejoice to do evil and delight in the frowardness of the
wicked
whose ways are crooked and they froward in their paths
to deliver thee from the strange woman even from the stranger
which flattereth with her words
which forsaketh the guide of her youth and forgetteth the
covenant of her God.
for her house inclineth unto death and her paths unto the
dead.
none that go unto her return again Neither take they hold of
the paths of life.
that thou mayest walk in the way of good men and keep the
paths of the righteous.
for the upright shall dwell in the land and the perfect shall
remain in it.
but the wicked shall be cut off from the earth and the
transgressors shall be rooted out of it.
my son forget not my law but let thine heart keep my
commandments
for length of days and long life and peace shall they add
to thee.
let not mercy and truth forsake thee bind them about thy
neck write them upon the table of thine heart
so shalt thou find favour and good understanding in the sight
of God and man.
trust in the lord with all thine heart and lean not unto
thine own understanding.
in all thy ways acknowledge him and he shall direct thy
paths.
be not wise in thine own eyes fear the lord and depart from
evil.
it shall be health to thy navel and marrow to thy bones.
honour the lord with thy substance and with the firstfruits
of all thine increase
so shall thy barns be filled with plenty and thy presses
shall burst out with new wine.
my son despise not the chastening of the lord Neither be
weary of his correction
for whom the lord loveth he correcteth even as a father the
son in whom he delighteth.
happy is the man that findeth wisdom and the man that getteth
understanding.
for the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of
Silver and the gain thereof than fine gold.
she is more precious than rubies and all the things thou
canst desire are not to be compared unto her.
length of days is in her right hand and in her left hand
Riches and honour.
her ways are ways of pleasantness and all her paths are
peace.
she is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her and
happy is every one that retaineth her.
the lord by wisdom hath founded the earth by understanding
hath he established the heavens.
by his knowledge the depths are broken up and the clouds drop
down the dew.
my son let not them depart from thine eyes keep sound wisdom
and discretion
so shall they be life unto thy soul and grace to thy neck.
then shalt thou walk in thy way safely and thy foot shall not
stumble.
when thou liest down thou shalt not be afraid yea thou
shalt lie down and thy sleep shall be sweet.
be not afraid of sudden fear Neither of the desolation of the
wicked when it cometh.
for the lord shall be thy confidence and shall keep thy foot
from being taken.
withhold not good from them to whom it is due when it is in
the power of thine hand to do it.
say not unto thy neighbour go and come again and to morrow
I will give when thou hast it by thee.
devise not evil against thy neighbour seeing he dwelleth
securely by thee.
strive not with a man without cause if he have done thee no
harm.
envy thou not the oppressor and choose none of his ways.
for the froward is abomination to the lord but his secret is
with the righteous.
the curse of the lord is in the house of the wicked but he
blesseth the habitation of the just.
surely he scorneth the scorners but he giveth grace unto the
lowly.
the wise shall inherit glory but shame shall be the promotion
of fools.
hear ye children the instruction of a father and attend to
know understanding.
for I give you good doctrine forsake ye not my law.
for I was my father s son tender and only beloved in the
sight of my mother.
he taught me also and said unto me let thine heart retain my
words keep my commandments and live.
get wisdom get understanding forget it not Neither decline
from the words of my mouth.
forsake her not and she shall preserve thee love her and
she shall keep thee.
wisdom is the principal thing therefore get wisdom and with
all thy getting get understanding.
exalt her and she shall promote thee she shall bring thee to
honour when thou dost embrace her.
she shall give to thine head an ornament of grace a crown of
glory shall she deliver to thee.
hear O my son and receive my sayings and the years of thy
life shall be many.
I have taught thee in the way of wisdom I have led thee in
right paths.
when thou goest thy steps shall not be straitened and when
thou runnest thou shalt not stumble.
take fast hold of instruction let her not go keep her for
she is thy life.
enter not into the path of the wicked and go not in the way
of evil men.
avoid it pass not by it turn from it and pass away.
for they sleep not except they have done mischief and their
sleep is taken away unless they cause some to fall.
for they eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine of
violence.
but the path of the just is as the shining light that shineth
more and more unto the perfect day.
the way of the wicked is as darkness they know not at what
they stumble.
my son attend to my words incline thine ear unto my sayings.
let them not depart from thine eyes keep them in the midst of
thine heart.
for they are life unto those that find them and health to all
their flesh.
keep thy heart with all diligence for out of it are the
issues of life.
put away from thee a froward mouth and perverse lips put far
from thee.
let thine eyes look right on and let thine eyelids look
straight before thee.
ponder the path of thy feet and let all thy ways be
established.
turn not to the right hand nor to the left remove thy foot
from evil.
my son attend unto my wisdom and bow thine ear to my
understanding
that thou mayest regard discretion and that thy lips may keep
knowledge.
for the lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb and her
mouth is smoother than oil
but her end is bitter as wormwood Sharp as a two-edged sword.
her feet go down to death her steps take hold on hell.
lest thou shouldest ponder the path of life her ways are
moveable that thou canst not know them.
hear me now therefore O ye children and depart not from the
words of my mouth.
remove thy way far from her and come not nigh the door of her
house
lest thou give thine honour unto others and thy years unto
the cruel
lest strangers be filled with thy wealth and thy labours be
in the house of a stranger
and thou mourn at the last when thy flesh and thy body are
consumed
and say how have I hated instruction and my heart despised
reproof
and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers nor inclined
mine ear to them that instructed me
I was almost in all evil in the midst of the congregation and
assembly.
drink waters out of thine own cistern and running waters out
of thine own well.
let thy fountains be dispersed abroad and rivers of waters in
the streets.
let them be only thine own and not strangers with thee.
let thy fountain be blessed and rejoice with the wife of thy
youth.
let her be as the loving hind and pleasant roe let her
breasts satisfy thee at all times and be thou ravished always
with her love.
and why wilt thou my son be ravished with a strange woman
and embrace the bosom of a stranger?
for the ways of man are before the eyes of the lord and he
pondereth all his goings.
his own iniquities shall take the wicked himself and he shall
be holden with the cords of his sins.
he shall die without instruction and in the greatness of his
folly he shall go astray.
my son if thou be surety for thy friend if thou hast
stricken thy hand with a stranger
thou art snared with the words of thy mouth thou art taken
with the words of thy mouth.
do this now my son and deliver thyself when thou art come
into the hand of thy friend go humble thyself and make sure
thy friend.
give not sleep to thine eyes nor slumber to thine eyelids.
deliver thyself as a roe from the hand of the hunter and as a
bird from the hand of the fowler.
go to the ant thou sluggard consider her ways and be wise
which having no guide overseer or ruler
provideth her meat in the summer and gathereth her food in
the harvest.
how long wilt thou sleep O sluggard? when wilt thou Arise out
of thy sleep?
yet a little sleep a little slumber a little folding of the
hands to sleep
so shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth and thy want
as an armed man.
a naughty person a wicked man walketh with a froward mouth.
he winketh with his eyes he speaketh with his feet he
teacheth with his fingers
frowardness is in his heart he deviseth mischief continually
he soweth discord.
therefore shall his calamity come suddenly suddenly shall he
be broken without remedy.
these six things doth the lord hate yea seven are an
abomination unto him
a proud look a lying tongue and hands that shed innocent
blood
an heart that deviseth wicked imaginations feet that be swift
in running to mischief
a false witness that speaketh lies and he that soweth discord
among brethren.
my son keep thy father s commandment and forsake not the law
of thy mother
bind them continually upon thine heart and tie them about thy
neck.
when thou goest it shall lead thee when thou sleepest it
shall keep thee and when thou awakest it shall talk with
thee.
for the commandment is a lamp and the law is light and
reproofs of instruction are the way of life
to keep thee from the evil woman from the flattery of the
tongue of a strange woman.
lust not after her beauty in thine heart Neither let her take
thee with her eyelids.
for by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of
bread and the adultress will hunt for the precious life.
can a man take fire in his bosom and his clothes not be
burned?
can one go upon hot coals and his feet not be burned?
so he that goeth in to his neighbour s wife whosoever
toucheth her shall not be innocent.
men do not despise a thief if he steal to satisfy his soul
when he is hungry
but if he be found he shall restore sevenfold he shall give
all the substance of his house.
but whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh
understanding he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul.
a wound and dishonour shall he get and his reproach shall not
be wiped away.
for jealousy is the rage of a man therefore he will not spare
in the day of vengeance.
he will not regard any ransom Neither will he rest content
though thou givest many gifts.
my son keep my words and lay up my commandments with thee.
keep my commandments and live and my law as the apple of
thine eye.
bind them upon thy fingers write them upon the table of thine
heart.
say unto wisdom thou art my sister and call understanding
thy kinswoman
that they may keep thee from the strange woman from the
stranger which flattereth with her words.
for at the window of my house I looked through my casement
and beheld among the simple ones I discerned among the
youths a young man void of understanding
passing through the street near her corner and he went the
way to her house
in the twilight in the evening in the black and dark night
and behold there met him a woman with the attire of an
harlot and subtil of heart.
 she is loud and stubborn her feet abide not in her house
now is she without now in the streets and lieth in wait at
every corner.
so she caught him and kissed him and with an impudent face
said unto him
I have peace offerings with me this day have I payed my vows.
therefore came I forth to meet thee diligently to seek thy
face and I have found thee.
I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry with carved
works with fine linen of Egypt.
I have perfumed my bed with myrrh aloes and cinnamon.
come let us take our fill of love until the morning let us
solace ourselves with loves.
for the goodman is not at home he is gone a long journey
he hath taken a bag of money with him and will come home at
the day appointed.
with her Much fair speech she caused him to yield with the
flattering of her lips she forced him.
he goeth after her straightway as an ox goeth to the
slaughter or as a fool to the correction of the stocks
till a dart strike through his liver as a bird hasteth to the
snare and knoweth not that it is for his life.
hearken unto me now therefore O ye children and attend to
the words of my mouth.
let not thine heart decline to her ways go not astray in her
paths.
for she hath cast down many wounded yea many strong men have
been slain by her.
her house is the way to hell going down to the chambers of
death.
doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice?
she standeth in the top of high places by the way in the
places of the paths.
she crieth at the gates at the entry of the city at the
coming in at the doors.
unto you O men I call and my voice is to the sons of man.
O ye simple understand wisdom and ye fools be ye of an
understanding heart.
hear for I will speak of excellent things and the opening of
my lips shall be right things.
for my mouth shall speak truth and wickedness is an
abomination to my lips.
all the words of my mouth are in righteousness there is
nothing froward or perverse in them.
they are all plain to him that understandeth and right to
them that find knowledge.
receive my instruction and not Silver and knowledge rather
than choice gold.
for wisdom is better than rubies and all the things that may
be desired are not to be compared to it.
I wisdom dwell with prudence and find out knowledge of witty
inventions.
the fear of the lord is to hate evil pride and arrogancy
and the evil way and the froward mouth do I hate.
counsel is mine and sound wisdom I Am understanding I have
strength.
by me kings reign and princes decree justice.
by me princes rule and nobles even all the judges of the
earth.
I love them that love me and those that seek me early shall
find me.
Riches and honour are with me yea durable Riches and
righteousness.
my fruit is better than gold yea than fine gold and my
revenue than choice Silver.
I lead in the way of righteousness in the midst of the paths
of judgment
that I may cause those that love me to inherit substance and
I will fill their treasures.
the lord possessed me in the beginning of his way before his
works of old.
I was set up from everlasting from the beginning or ever the
earth was.
when there were no depths I was brought forth when there
were no fountains abounding with water.
before the mountains were settled before the hills was I
brought forth
while as yet he had not made the earth nor the fields nor
the highest part of the dust of the world.
when he prepared the heavens I was there when he set a
compass upon the face of the depth
when he established the clouds above when he strengthened the
fountains of the deep
when he gave to the sea his decree that the waters should not
pass his commandment when he appointed the foundations of the
earth
then I was by him as one brought up with him and I was daily
his delight rejoicing always before him
rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth and my delights
were with the sons of men.
now therefore hearken unto me O ye children for blessed are
they that keep my ways.
hear instruction and be wise and refuse it not.
blessed is the man that heareth me watching daily at my
gates waiting at the posts of my doors.
for whoso findeth me findeth life and shall obtain favour of
the lord.
but he that sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul all they
that hate me love death.
wisdom hath builded her house she hath hewn out her seven
pillars
she hath killed her beasts she hath mingled her wine she
hath also furnished her table.
she hath sent forth her maidens she crieth upon the highest
places of the city
whoso is simple let him turn in hither as for him that
wanteth understanding she saith to him
come eat of my bread and drink of the wine which I have
mingled.
forsake the foolish and live and go in the way of
understanding.
he that reproveth a scorner getteth to himself shame and he
that rebuketh a wicked man getteth himself a blot.
reprove not a scorner lest he hate thee rebuke a wise man
and he will love thee.
give instruction to a wise man and he will be yet wiser
teach a just man and he will increase in learning.
the fear of the lord is the beginning of wisdom and the
knowledge of the holy is understanding.
for by me thy days shall be multiplied and the years of thy
life shall be increased.
if thou be wise thou shalt be wise for thyself but if thou
scornest thou alone shalt bear it.
a foolish woman is clamorous she is simple and knoweth
nothing.
for she sitteth at the door of her house on a seat in the
high places of the city
to call passengers who go right on their ways
whoso is simple let him turn in hither and as for him that
wanteth understanding she saith to him
stolen waters are sweet and bread eaten in secret is
pleasant.
but he knoweth not that the dead are there and that her
guests are in the depths of hell.
the proverbs of Solomon. a wise son maketh a glad father but
a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.
treasures of wickedness profit nothing but righteousness
delivereth from death.
the lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish
but he casteth away the substance of the wicked.
he becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand but the hand
of the diligent maketh rich.
he that gathereth in summer is a wise son but he that
sleepeth in harvest is a son that causeth shame.
blessings are upon the head of the just but violence covereth
the mouth of the wicked.
the memory of the just is blessed but the name of the wicked
shall rot.
the wise in heart will receive commandments but a prating
fool shall fall.
he that walketh uprightly walketh surely but he that
perverteth his ways shall be known.
he that winketh with the eye causeth sorrow but a prating
fool shall fall.
the mouth of a righteous man is a well of life but violence
covereth the mouth of the wicked.
hatred stirreth up strifes but love covereth all sins.
in the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found
but a rod is for the back of him that is void of
understanding.
wise men lay up knowledge but the mouth of the foolish is
near destruction.
the rich man s wealth is his strong city the destruction of
the poor is their poverty.
the labour of the righteous tendeth to life the fruit of the
wicked to Sin.
he is in the way of life that keepeth instruction but he that
refuseth reproof erreth.
he that hideth hatred with lying lips and he that uttereth a
slander is a fool.
in the multitude of words there wanteth not Sin but he that
refraineth his lips is wise.
the tongue of the just is as choice Silver the heart of the
wicked is little worth.
the lips of the righteous feed many but fools die for want of
wisdom.
the blessing of the lord it maketh rich and he addeth no
sorrow with it.
it is as sport to a fool to do mischief but a man of
understanding hath wisdom.
the fear of the wicked it shall come upon him but the desire
of the righteous shall be granted.
as the whirlwind passeth so is the wicked no more but the
righteous is an everlasting foundation.
as vinegar to the teeth and as smoke to the eyes so is the
sluggard to them that send him.
the fear of the lord prolongeth days but the years of the
wicked shall be shortened.
the hope of the righteous shall be gladness but the
expectation of the wicked shall perish.
the way of the lord is strength to the upright but
destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity.
the righteous shall never be removed but the wicked shall not
inhabit the earth.
the mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom but the froward
tongue shall be cut out.
the lips of the righteous know what is acceptable but the
mouth of the wicked speaketh frowardness.
a false balance is abomination to the lord but a just weight
is his delight.
when pride cometh then cometh shame but with the lowly is
wisdom.
the integrity of the upright shall guide them but the
perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them.
Riches profit not in the day of wrath but righteousness
delivereth from death.
the righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way but the
wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.
the righteousness of the upright shall deliver them but
transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness.
when a wicked man dieth his expectation shall perish and the
hope of unjust men perisheth.
the righteous is delivered out of trouble and the wicked
cometh in his stead.
an hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbour but
through knowledge shall the just be delivered.
when it goeth well with the righteous the city rejoiceth and
when the wicked perish there is shouting.
by the blessing of the upright the city is exalted but it is
overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.
he that is void of wisdom despiseth his neighbour but a man
of understanding holdeth his peace.
a talebearer revealeth secrets but he that is of a faithful
spirit concealeth the matter.
where no counsel is the people fall but in the multitude of
counsellors there is safety.
he that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it and he
that hateth suretiship is sure.
a gracious woman retaineth honour and strong men retain
Riches.
the merciful man doeth good to his own soul but he that is
cruel troubleth his own flesh.
the wicked worketh a deceitful work but to him that soweth
righteousness shall be a sure reward.
as righteousness tendeth to life so he that pursueth evil
pursueth it to his own death.
they that are of a froward heart are abomination to the lord
but such as are upright in their way are his delight.
though hand join in hand the wicked shall not be unpunished
but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered.
as a jewel of gold in a swine s snout so is a fair woman
which is without discretion.
the desire of the righteous is only good but the expectation
of the wicked is wrath.
there is that scattereth and yet increaseth and there is
that withholdeth more than is meet but it tendeth to poverty.
the liberal soul shall be made fat and he that watereth shall
be watered also himself.
he that withholdeth corn the people shall curse him but
blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it.
he that diligently seeketh good procureth favour but he that
seeketh mischief it shall come unto him.
he that trusteth in his Riches shall fall but the righteous
shall flourish as a branch.
he that troubleth his own house shall inherit the wind and
the fool shall be servant to the wise of heart.
the fruit of the righteous is a tree of life and he that
winneth souls is wise.
behold the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth Much
more the wicked and the sinner.
whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge but he that hateth
reproof is brutish.
a good man obtaineth favour of the lord but a man of wicked
devices will he condemn.
a man shall not be established by wickedness but the root of
the righteous shall not be moved.
a virtuous woman is a crown to her husband but she that
maketh ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.
the thoughts of the righteous are right but the counsels of
the wicked are deceit.
the words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood but the
mouth of the upright shall deliver them.
the wicked are overthrown and are not but the house of the
righteous shall stand.
a man shall be commended according to his wisdom but he that
is of a perverse heart shall be despised.
he that is despised and hath a servant is better than he
that honoureth himself and lacketh bread.
a righteous man regardeth the life of his beast but the
tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.
he that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread but he
that followeth vain persons is void of understanding.
the wicked desireth the net of evil men but the root of the
righteous yieldeth fruit.
the wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips but the
just shall come out of trouble.
a man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth
and the recompence of a man s hands shall be rendered unto
him.
the way of a fool is right in his own eyes but he that
hearkeneth unto counsel is wise.
a fool s wrath is presently known but a prudent man covereth
shame.
he that speaketh truth sheweth forth righteousness but a
false witness deceit.
there is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword but the
tongue of the wise is health.
the lip of truth shall be established for ever but a lying
tongue is but for a moment.
deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil but to the
counsellors of peace is joy.
there shall no evil happen to the just but the wicked shall
be filled with mischief.
lying lips are abomination to the lord but they that deal
truly are his delight.
a prudent man concealeth knowledge but the heart of fools
proclaimeth foolishness.
the hand of the diligent shall bear rule but the slothful
shall be under tribute.
heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop but a good word
maketh it glad.
the righteous is more excellent than his neighbour but the
way of the wicked seduceth them.
the slothful man roasteth not that which he took in hunting
but the substance of a diligent man is precious.
in the way of righteousness is life and in the pathway
thereof there is no death.
a wise son heareth his father s instruction but a scorner
heareth not rebuke.
a man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth but the soul
of the transgressors shall eat violence.
he that keepeth his mouth keepeth his life but he that
openeth wide his lips shall have destruction.
the soul of the sluggard desireth and hath nothing but the
soul of the diligent shall be made fat.
a righteous man hateth lying but a wicked man is loathsome
and cometh to shame.
righteousness keepeth him that is upright in the way but
wickedness overthroweth the sinner.
there is that maketh himself rich yet hath nothing there is
that maketh himself poor yet hath great Riches.
the ransom of a man s life are his Riches but the poor
heareth not rebuke.
the light of the righteous rejoiceth but the lamp of the
wicked shall be put out.
only by pride cometh contention but with the well advised is
wisdom.
wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished but he that
gathereth by labour shall increase.
hope deferred maketh the heart sick but when the desire
cometh it is a tree of life.
whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed but he that
feareth the commandment shall be rewarded.
the law of the wise is a fountain of life to depart from the
snares of death.
good understanding giveth favour but the way of transgressors
is hard.
every prudent man dealeth with knowledge but a fool layeth
open his folly.
a wicked messenger falleth into mischief but a faithful
ambassador is health.
poverty and shame shall be to him that refuseth instruction
but he that regardeth reproof shall be honoured.
the desire accomplished is sweet to the soul but it is
abomination to fools to depart from evil.
he that walketh with wise men shall be wise but a companion
of fools shall be destroyed.
evil pursueth sinners but to the righteous good shall be
repayed.
a good man leaveth an inheritance to his children s children
and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.
Much food is in the tillage of the poor but there is that is
destroyed for want of judgment.
he that spareth his rod hateth his son but he that loveth him
chasteneth him betimes.
the righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul but the
belly of the wicked shall want.
every wise woman buildeth her house but the foolish plucketh
it down with her hands.
he that walketh in his uprightness feareth the lord but he
that is perverse in his ways despiseth him.
in the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride but the lips of
the wise shall preserve them.
where no oxen are the crib is clean but Much increase is by
the strength of the ox.
a faithful witness will not lie but a false witness will
utter lies.
a scorner seeketh wisdom and findeth it not but knowledge is
easy unto him that understandeth.
go from the presence of a foolish man when thou perceivest
not in him the lips of knowledge.
the wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way but the
folly of fools is deceit.
fools make a mock at Sin but among the righteous there is
favour.
the heart knoweth his own bitterness and a stranger doth not
intermeddle with his joy.
the house of the wicked shall be overthrown but the
tabernacle of the upright shall flourish.
there is a way which seemeth right unto a man but the end
thereof are the ways of death.
even in laughter the heart is sorrowful and the end of that
mirth is heaviness.
the backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways and
a good man shall be satisfied from himself.
the simple believeth every word but the prudent man looketh
well to his going.
a wise man feareth and departeth from evil but the fool
rageth and is confident.
he that is soon angry dealeth foolishly and a man of wicked
devices is hated.
the simple inherit folly but the prudent are crowned with
knowledge.
the evil bow before the good and the wicked at the gates of
the righteous.
the poor is hated even of his own neighbour but the rich hath
many friends.
he that despiseth his neighbour sinneth but he that hath
mercy on the poor happy is he.
do they not err that devise evil? but mercy and truth shall be
to them that devise good.
in all labour there is profit but the talk of the lips
tendeth only to penury.
the crown of the wise is their Riches but the foolishness of
fools is folly.
a true witness delivereth souls but a deceitful witness
speaketh lies.
in the fear of the lord is strong confidence and his children
shall have a place of refuge.
the fear of the lord is a fountain of life to depart from the
snares of death.
in the multitude of people is the king s honour but in the
want of people is the destruction of the prince.
he that is slow to wrath is of great understanding but he
that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly.
a sound heart is the life of the flesh but envy the
rottenness of the bones.
he that oppresseth the poor reproacheth his maker but he that
honoureth him hath mercy on the poor.
the wicked is driven away in his wickedness but the righteous
hath hope in his death.
wisdom resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding
but that which is in the midst of fools is made known.
righteousness exalteth a nation but Sin is a reproach to any
people.
the king s favour is toward a wise servant but his wrath is
against him that causeth shame.
a soft answer turneth away wrath but grievous words stir up
anger.
the tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright but the mouth
of fools poureth out foolishness.
the eyes of the lord are in every place beholding the evil
and the good.
a wholesome tongue is a tree of life but perverseness therein
is a breach in the spirit.
a fool despiseth his father s instruction but he that
regardeth reproof is prudent.
in the house of the righteous is Much treasure but in the
revenues of the wicked is trouble.
the lips of the wise disperse knowledge but the heart of the
foolish doeth not so.
the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the lord but
the prayer of the upright is his delight.
the way of the wicked is an abomination unto the lord but he
loveth him that followeth after righteousness.
correction is grievous unto him that forsaketh the way and he
that hateth reproof shall die.
hell and destruction are before the lord how Much more then
the hearts of the children of men?
a scorner loveth not one that reproveth him Neither will he
go unto the wise.
a merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance but by sorrow of
the heart the spirit is broken.
the heart of him that hath understanding seeketh knowledge
but the mouth of fools feedeth on foolishness.
all the days of the afflicted are evil but he that is of a
merry heart hath a continual feast.
better is little with the fear of the lord than great treasure
and trouble therewith.
better is a dinner of herbs where love is than a stalled ox
and hatred therewith.
a wrathful man stirreth up strife but he that is slow to
anger appeaseth strife.
the way of the slothful man is as an hedge of thorns but the
way of the righteous is made plain.
a wise son maketh a glad father but a foolish man despiseth
his mother.
folly is joy to him that is destitute of wisdom but a man of
understanding walketh uprightly.
without counsel purposes are disappointed but in the
multitude of counsellors they are established.
a man hath joy by the answer of his mouth and a word spoken
in due season how good is it
the way of life is above to the wise that he may depart from
hell beneath.
the lord will destroy the house of the proud but he will
establish the border of the widow.
the thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the lord but
the words of the pure are pleasant words.
he that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house but he that
hateth gifts shall live.
the heart of the righteous studieth to answer but the mouth
of the wicked poureth out evil things.
the lord is far from the wicked but he heareth the prayer of
the righteous.
the light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart and a good report
maketh the bones fat.
the ear that heareth the reproof of life abideth among the
wise.
he that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul but he
that heareth reproof getteth understanding.
the fear of the lord is the instruction of wisdom and before
honour is humility.
the preparations of the heart in man and the answer of the
tongue is from the lord.
all the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes but the lord
weigheth the spirits.
commit thy works unto the lord and thy thoughts shall be
established.
the lord hath made all things for himself yea even the
wicked for the day of evil.
every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the
lord though hand join in hand he shall not be unpunished.
by mercy and truth iniquity is purged and by the fear of the
lord men depart from evil.
when a man s ways please the lord he maketh even his enemies
to be at peace with him.
better is a little with righteousness than great revenues
without right.
a man s heart deviseth his way but the lord directeth his
steps.
a divine sentence is in the lips of the king his mouth
transgresseth not in judgment.
a just weight and balance are the lord s all the weights of
the bag are his work.
it is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness for the
throne is established by righteousness.
righteous lips are the delight of kings and they love him
that speaketh right.
the wrath of a king is as messengers of death but a wise man
will pacify it.
in the light of the king s countenance is life and his favour
is as a cloud of the latter rain.
how Much better is it to get wisdom than gold and to get
understanding rather to be chosen than Silver
the highway of the upright is to depart from evil he that
keepeth his way preserveth his soul.
pride goeth before destruction and an haughty spirit before a
fall.
better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly than to
divide the spoil with the proud.
he that handleth a matter wisely shall find good and whoso
trusteth in the lord happy is he.
the wise in heart shall be called prudent and the sweetness
of the lips increaseth learning.
understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that hath it
but the instruction of fools is folly.
the heart of the wise teacheth his mouth and addeth learning
to his lips.
pleasant words are as an honeycomb sweet to the soul and
health to the bones.
there is a way that seemeth right unto a man but the end
thereof are the ways of death.
he that laboureth laboureth for himself for his mouth craveth
it of him.
an ungodly man diggeth up evil and in his lips there is as a
burning fire.
a froward man soweth strife and a whisperer separateth chief
friends.
a violent man enticeth his neighbour and leadeth him into the
way that is not good.
he shutteth his eyes to devise froward things moving his lips
he bringeth evil to pass.
the hoary head is a crown of glory if it be found in the way
of righteousness.
he that is slow to anger is better than the Mighty and he
that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.
the Lot is cast into the lap but the whole disposing thereof
is of the lord.
better is a dry morsel and quietness therewith than an house
full of sacrifices with strife.
a wise servant shall have rule over a son that causeth shame
and shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren.
the fining pot is for Silver and the furnace for gold but
the lord trieth the hearts.
a wicked doer giveth heed to false lips and a liar giveth ear
to a naughty tongue.
whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his maker and he that is
glad at calamities shall not be unpunished.
children s children are the crown of old men and the glory of
children are their fathers.
excellent speech becometh not a fool Much less do lying lips
a prince.
a gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that hath it
whithersoever it turneth it prospereth.
he that covereth a transgression seeketh love but he that
repeateth a matter separateth very friends.
a reproof entereth more into a wise man than an hundred
stripes into a fool.
an evil man seeketh only rebellion therefore a cruel
messenger shall be sent against him.
let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man rather than a fool
in his folly.
whoso rewardeth evil for good evil shall not depart from his
house.
the beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water
therefore leave off contention before it be meddled with.
he that justifieth the wicked and he that condemneth the
just even they both are abomination to the lord.
wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get
wisdom seeing he hath no heart to it?
a friend loveth at all times and a brother is born for
adversity.
a man void of understanding striketh hands and becometh
surety in the presence of his friend.
he loveth transgression that loveth strife and he that
exalteth his gate seeketh destruction.
he that hath a froward heart findeth no good and he that hath
a perverse tongue falleth into mischief.
he that begetteth a fool doeth it to his sorrow and the
father of a fool hath no joy.
a merry heart doeth good like a medicine but a broken spirit
drieth the bones.
a wicked man taketh a gift out of the bosom to pervert the
ways of judgment.
wisdom is before him that hath understanding but the eyes of
a fool are in the ends of the earth.
a foolish son is a grief to his father and bitterness to her
that bare him.
also to punish the just is not good nor to strike princes for
equity.
he that hath knowledge spareth his words and a man of
understanding is of an excellent spirit.
even a fool when he holdeth his peace is counted wise and
he that shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of understanding.
through desire a man having separated himself seeketh and
intermeddleth with all wisdom.
a fool hath no delight in understanding but that his heart
may discover itself.
when the wicked cometh then cometh also contempt and with
ignominy reproach.
the words of a man s mouth are as deep waters and the
wellspring of wisdom as a flowing brook.
it is not good to accept the person of the wicked to
overthrow the righteous in judgment.
a fool s lips enter into contention and his mouth calleth for
strokes.
a fool s mouth is his destruction and his lips are the snare
of his soul.
the words of a talebearer are as wounds and they go down into
the innermost parts of the belly.
he also that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is
a great waster.
the name of the lord is a strong tower the righteous runneth
into it and is safe.
the rich man s wealth is his strong city and as an high wall
in his own conceit.
before destruction the heart of man is haughty and before
honour is humility.
he that answereth a matter before he heareth it it is folly
and shame unto him.
the spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity but a wounded
spirit who can bear?
the heart of the prudent getteth knowledge and the ear of the
wise seeketh knowledge.
a man s gift maketh room for him and bringeth him before
great men.
he that is first in his own cause seemeth just but his
neighbour cometh and searcheth him.
the Lot causeth contentions to cease and parteth between the
Mighty.
a brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city and
their contentions are like the bars of a castle.
a man s belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth
and with the increase of his lips shall he be filled.
death and life are in the power of the tongue and they that
love it shall eat the fruit thereof.
whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing and obtaineth
favour of the lord.
the poor useth intreaties but the rich answereth roughly.
a man that hath friends must shew himself friendly and there
is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.
better is the poor that walketh in his integrity than he that
is perverse in his lips and is a fool.
also that the soul be without knowledge it is not good and
he that hasteth with his feet sinneth.
the foolishness of man perverteth his way and his heart
fretteth against the lord.
wealth maketh many friends but the poor is separated from his
neighbour.
a false witness shall not be unpunished and he that speaketh
lies shall not escape.
many will intreat the favour of the prince and every man is a
friend to him that giveth gifts.
all the brethren of the poor do hate him how Much more do his
friends go far from him? he pursueth them with words yet they
are wanting to him.
he that getteth wisdom loveth his own soul he that keepeth
understanding shall find good.
a false witness shall not be unpunished and he that speaketh
lies shall perish.
delight is not seemly for a fool Much less for a servant to
have rule over princes.
the discretion of a man deferreth his anger and it is his
glory to pass over a transgression.
the king s wrath is as the roaring of a lion but his favour
is as dew upon the grass.
a foolish son is the calamity of his father and the
contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.
house and Riches are the inheritance of fathers and a prudent
wife is from the lord.
slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep and an idle soul shall
suffer hunger.
he that keepeth the commandment keepeth his own soul but he
that despiseth his ways shall die.
he that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the lord and
that which he hath given will he pay him again.
chasten thy son while there is hope and let not thy soul
spare for his crying.
a man of great wrath shall suffer punishment for if thou
deliver him yet thou must do it again.
hear counsel and receive instruction that thou mayest be
wise in thy latter end.
there are many devices in a man s heart nevertheless the
counsel of the lord that shall stand.
the desire of a man is his kindness and a poor man is better
than a liar.
the fear of the lord tendeth to life and he that hath it
shall abide satisfied he shall not be visited with evil.
a slothful man hideth his hand in his bosom and will not so
Much as bring it to his mouth again.
smite a scorner and the simple will beware and reprove one
that hath understanding and he will understand knowledge.
he that wasteth his father and chaseth away his mother is a
son that causeth shame and bringeth reproach.
cease my son to hear the instruction that causeth to err
from the words of knowledge.
an ungodly witness scorneth judgment and the mouth of the
wicked devoureth iniquity.
judgments are prepared for scorners and stripes for the back
of fools.
wine is a mocker strong drink is raging and whosoever is
deceived thereby is not wise.
the fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion whoso
provoketh him to anger sinneth against his own soul.
it is an honour for a man to cease from strife but every fool
will be meddling.
the sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold therefore
shall he beg in harvest and have nothing.
counsel in the heart of man is like deep water but a man of
understanding will draw it out.
most men will proclaim every one his own goodness but a
faithful man who can find?
the just man walketh in his integrity his children are
blessed after him.
a king that sitteth in the throne of judgment scattereth away
all evil with his eyes.
who can say I have made my heart clean I Am pure from my
Sin?
divers weights and divers measures both of them are alike
abomination to the lord.
even a child is known by his doings whether his work be pure
and whether it be right.
the hearing ear and the seeing eye the lord hath made even
both of them.
love not sleep lest thou come to poverty open thine eyes
and thou shalt be satisfied with bread.
it is naught it is naught saith the buyer but when he is
gone his way then he boasteth.
there is gold and a multitude of rubies but the lips of
knowledge are a precious jewel.
take his garment that is surety for a stranger and take a
pledge of him for a strange woman.
bread of deceit is sweet to a man but afterwards his mouth
shall be filled with gravel.
every purpose is established by counsel and with good advice
make war.
he that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth secrets
therefore meddle not with him that flattereth with his lips.
whoso curseth his father or his mother his lamp shall be put
out in obscure darkness.
an inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning but the
end thereof shall not be blessed.
say not thou I will recompense evil but wait on the lord
and he shall save thee.
divers weights are an abomination unto the lord and a false
balance is not good.
man s goings are of the lord how can a man then understand
his own way?
it is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy and
after vows to make enquiry.
a wise king scattereth the wicked and bringeth the wheel over
them.
the spirit of man is the candle of the lord searching all the
inward parts of the belly.
mercy and truth preserve the king and his throne is upholden
by mercy.
the glory of young men is their strength and the beauty of
old men is the grey head.
the blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil so do stripes the
inward parts of the belly.
the king s heart is in the hand of the lord as the rivers of
water he turneth it whithersoever he will.
every way of a man is right in his own eyes but the lord
pondereth the hearts.
to do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the lord than
sacrifice.
an high look and a proud heart and the plowing of the
wicked is Sin.
the thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness but
of every one that is hasty only to want.
the getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a vanity tossed
to and fro of them that seek death.
the robbery of the wicked shall destroy them because they
refuse to do judgment.
the way of man is froward and strange but as for the pure
his work is right.
it is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop than with a
brawling woman in a wide house.
the soul of the wicked desireth evil his neighbour findeth no
favour in his eyes.
when the scorner is punished the simple is made wise and
when the wise is instructed he receiveth knowledge.
the righteous man wisely considereth the house of the wicked
but God overthroweth the wicked for their wickedness.
whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor he also shall
cry himself but shall not be heard.
a gift in secret pacifieth anger and a reward in the bosom
strong wrath.
it is joy to the just to do judgment but destruction shall be
to the workers of iniquity.
the man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall
remain in the congregation of the dead.
he that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man he that loveth
wine and oil shall not be rich.
the wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous and the
transgressor for the upright.
it is better to dwell in the wilderness than with a
contentious and an angry woman.
there is treasure to be desired and oil in the dwelling of the
wise but a foolish man spendeth it up.
he that followeth after righteousness and mercy findeth life
righteousness and honour.
a wise man scaleth the city of the Mighty and casteth down
the strength of the confidence thereof.
whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from
troubles.
proud and haughty scorner is his name who dealeth in proud
wrath.
the desire of the slothful killeth him for his hands refuse
to labour.
he coveteth greedily all the day long but the righteous
giveth and spareth not.
the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination how Much more
when he bringeth it with a wicked mind?
a false witness shall perish but the man that heareth
speaketh constantly.
a wicked man hardeneth his face but as for the upright he
directeth his way.
there is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the
lord.
the horse is prepared against the day of battle but safety is
of the lord.
a good name is rather to be chosen than great Riches and
loving favour rather than Silver and gold.
the rich and poor meet together the lord is the maker of them
all.
a prudent man foreseeth the evil and hideth himself but the
simple pass on and are punished.
by humility and the fear of the lord are Riches and honour
and life.
thorns and snares are in the way of the froward he that doth
keep his soul shall be far from them.
train up a child in the way he should go and when he is old
he will not depart from it.
the rich ruleth over the poor and the borrower is servant to
the lender.
he that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity and the rod of his
anger shall fail.
he that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed for he giveth
of his bread to the poor.
cast out the scorner and contention shall go out yea strife
and reproach shall cease.
he that loveth pureness of heart for the grace of his lips
the king shall be his friend.
the eyes of the lord preserve knowledge and he overthroweth
the words of the transgressor.
the slothful man saith there is a lion without I shall be
slain in the streets.
the mouth of strange women is a deep pit he that is abhorred
of the lord shall fall therein.
foolishness is bound in the heart of a child but the rod of
correction shall drive it far from him.
he that oppresseth the poor to increase his Riches and he
that giveth to the rich shall surely come to want.
bow down thine ear and hear the words of the wise and apply
thine heart unto my knowledge.
for it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee they
shall withal be fitted in thy lips.
that thy trust may be in the lord I have made known to thee
this day even to thee.
have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and
knowledge
that I might make thee know the certainty of the words of
truth that thou mightest answer the words of truth to them
that send unto thee?
rob not the poor because he is poor Neither oppress the
afflicted in the gate
for the lord will plead their cause and spoil the soul of
those that spoiled them.
make no friendship with an angry man and with a furious man
thou shalt not go
lest thou learn his ways and get a snare to thy soul.
be not thou one of them that strike hands or of them that are
sureties for debts.
if thou hast nothing to pay why should he take away thy bed
from under thee?
remove not the ancient landmark which thy fathers have set.
seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand
before kings he shall not stand before mean men.
when thou sittest to eat with a ruler consider diligently
what is before thee
and put a knife to thy throat if thou be a man given to
appetite.
be not desirous of his dainties for they are deceitful meat.
labour not to be rich cease from thine own wisdom.
wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for Riches
certainly make themselves wings they fly away as an eagle
toward heaven.
eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye Neither
desire thou his dainty meats
for as he thinketh in his heart so is he eat and drink
saith he to thee but his heart is not with thee.
the morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up and lose
thy sweet words.
speak not in the ears of a fool for he will despise the
wisdom of thy words.
remove not the old landmark and enter not into the fields of
the fatherless
for their redeemer is Mighty he shall plead their cause with
thee.
apply thine heart unto instruction and thine ears to the
words of knowledge.
withhold not correction from the child for if thou beatest
him with the rod he shall not die.
thou shalt beat him with the rod and shalt deliver his soul
from hell.
my son if thine heart be wise my heart shall rejoice even
mine.
yea my reins shall rejoice when thy lips speak right things.
let not thine heart envy sinners but be thou in the fear of
the lord all the day long.
for surely there is an end and thine expectation shall not be
cut off.
hear thou my son and be wise and guide thine heart in the
way.
be not among winebibbers among riotous eaters of flesh
for the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty and
drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.
hearken unto thy father that begat thee and despise not thy
mother when she is old.
buy the truth and sell it not also wisdom and instruction
and understanding.
the father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice and he that
begetteth a wise child shall have joy of him.
thy father and thy mother shall be glad and she that bare
thee shall rejoice.
my son give me thine heart and let thine eyes observe my
ways.
for a whore is a deep ditch and a strange woman is a narrow
pit.
she also lieth in wait as for a prey and increaseth the
transgressors among men.
who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath
babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of
eyes?
they that tarry long at the wine they that go to seek mixed
wine.
look not thou upon the wine when it is red when it giveth his
colour in the cup when it moveth itself aright.
at the last it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an
adder.
thine eyes shall behold strange women and thine heart shall
utter perverse things.
yea thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the
sea or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.
they have stricken me shalt thou say and I was not sick
they have beaten me and I felt it not when shall I awake? I
will seek it yet again.
be not thou envious against evil men Neither desire to be
with them.
for their heart studieth destruction and their lips talk of
mischief.
through wisdom is an house builded and by understanding it is
established
and by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all
precious and pleasant Riches.
a wise man is strong yea a man of knowledge increaseth
strength.
for by wise counsel thou shalt make thy war and in multitude
of counsellors there is safety.
wisdom is too high for a fool he openeth not his mouth in the
gate.
he that deviseth to do evil shall be called a mischievous
person.
the thought of foolishness is Sin and the scorner is an
abomination to men.
if thou faint in the day of adversity thy strength is small.
if thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death and
those that are ready to be slain
if thou sayest behold we knew it not doth not he that
pondereth the heart consider it? and he that keepeth thy soul
doth not he know it? and shall not he render to every man
according to his works?
my son eat thou honey because it is good and the honeycomb
which is sweet to thy taste
so shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul when thou
hast found it then there shall be a reward and thy
expectation shall not be cut off.
lay not wait O wicked man against the dwelling of the
righteous spoil not his resting place
for a just man falleth seven times and riseth up again but
the wicked shall fall into mischief.
rejoice not when thine enemy falleth and let not thine heart
be glad when he stumbleth
lest the lord see it and it displease him and he turn away
his wrath from him.
fret not thyself because of evil men Neither be thou envious
at the wicked
for there shall be no reward to the evil man the candle of
the wicked shall be put out.
my son fear thou the lord and the king and meddle not with
them that are given to change
for their calamity shall rise suddenly and who knoweth the
ruin of them both?
these things also belong to the wise. it is not good to have
respect of persons in judgment.
he that saith unto the wicked thou are righteous him shall
the people curse nations shall abhor him
but to them that rebuke him shall be delight and a good
blessing shall come upon them.
every man shall Kiss his lips that giveth a right answer.
prepare thy work without and make it fit for thyself in the
field and afterwards build thine house.
be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause and
deceive not with thy lips.
say not I will do so to him as he hath done to me I will
render to the man according to his work.
I went by the field of the slothful and by the vineyard of
the man void of understanding
and lo it was all grown over with thorns and nettles had
covered the face thereof and the stone wall thereof was
broken down.
then I saw and considered it well I looked upon it and
received instruction.
yet a little sleep a little slumber a little folding of the
hands to sleep
so shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth and thy want
as an armed man.
these are also proverbs of Solomon which the men of Hezekiah
king of Judah copied out.
it is the glory of God to conceal a thing but the honour of
kings is to search out a matter.
the heaven for height and the earth for depth and the heart
of kings is unsearchable.
take away the dross from the Silver and there shall come
forth a vessel for the finer.
take away the wicked from before the king and his throne
shall be established in righteousness.
put not forth thyself in the presence of the king and stand
not in the place of great men
for better it is that it be said unto thee come up hither
than that thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the
prince whom thine eyes have seen.
go not forth hastily to strive lest thou know not what to do
in the end thereof when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame.
debate thy cause with thy neighbour himself and discover not
a secret to another
lest he that heareth it put thee to shame and thine infamy
turn not away.
a word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of
Silver.
as an earring of gold and an ornament of fine gold so is a
wise reprover upon an obedient ear.
as the cold of snow in the time of harvest so is a faithful
messenger to them that send him for he refresheth the soul of
his masters.
whoso boasteth himself of a false gift is like clouds and wind
without rain.
by long forbearing is a prince persuaded and a soft tongue
breaketh the bone.
hast thou found honey? eat so Much as is sufficient for thee
lest thou be filled therewith and vomit it.
withdraw thy foot from thy neighbour s house lest he be weary
of thee and so hate thee.
a man that beareth false witness against his neighbour is a
maul and a sword and a Sharp arrow.
confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a
broken tooth and a foot out of joint.
as he that taketh away a garment in cold weather and as
vinegar upon nitre so is he that singeth songs to an heavy
heart.
if thine enemy be hungry give him bread to eat and if he be
thirsty give him water to drink
for thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head and the lord
shall reward thee.
the north wind driveth away rain so doth an angry countenance
a backbiting tongue.
it is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop than with
a brawling woman and in a wide house.
as cold waters to a thirsty soul so is good news from a far
country.
a righteous man falling down before the wicked is as a
troubled fountain and a corrupt spring.
it is not good to eat Much honey so for men to search their
own glory is not glory.
he that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that
is broken down and without walls.
as snow in summer and as rain in harvest so honour is not
seemly for a fool.
as the bird by wandering as the swallow by flying so the
curse causeless shall not come.
a whip for the horse a bridle for the ass and a rod for the
fool s back.
answer not a fool according to his folly lest thou also be
like unto him.
answer a fool according to his folly lest he be wise in his
own conceit.
he that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off
the feet and drinketh damage.
the legs of the lame are not equal so is a parable in the
mouth of fools.
as he that bindeth a stone in a sling so is he that giveth
honour to a fool.
as a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard so is a
parable in the mouths of fools.
the great God that formed all things both rewardeth the fool
and rewardeth transgressors.
as a dog returneth to his vomit so a fool returneth to his
folly.
seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope
of a fool than of him.
the slothful man saith there is a lion in the way a lion is
in the streets.
as the door turneth upon his hinges so doth the slothful upon
his bed.
the slothful hideth his hand in his bosom it grieveth him to
bring it again to his mouth.
the sluggard is wiser in his own conceit than seven men that
can render a reason.
he that passeth by and meddleth with strife belonging not to
him is like one that taketh a dog by the ears.
as a mad man who casteth firebrands arrows and death
so is the man that deceiveth his neighbour and saith Am not
I in sport?
where no wood is there the fire goeth out so where there is
no talebearer the strife ceaseth.
as coals are to burning coals and wood to fire so is a
contentious man to kindle strife.
the words of a talebearer are as wounds and they go down into
the innermost parts of the belly.
burning lips and a wicked heart are like a potsherd covered
with Silver dross.
he that hateth dissembleth with his lips and layeth up deceit
within him
when he speaketh fair believe him not for there are seven
abominations in his heart.
whose hatred is covered by deceit his wickedness shall be
shewed before the whole congregation.
whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein and he that rolleth a
stone it will return upon him.
a lying tongue hateth those that are afflicted by it and a
flattering mouth worketh ruin.
boast not thyself of to morrow for thou knowest not what a
day may bring forth.
let another man praise thee and not thine own mouth a
stranger and not thine own lips.
a stone is heavy and the sand weighty but a fool s wrath is
heavier than them both.
wrath is cruel and anger is outrageous but who is able to
stand before envy?
open rebuke is better than secret love.
faithful are the wounds of a friend but the kisses of an
enemy are deceitful.
the full soul loatheth an honeycomb but to the hungry soul
every bitter thing is sweet.
as a bird that wandereth from her nest so is a man that
wandereth from his place.
ointment and perfume rejoice the heart so doth the sweetness
of a man s friend by hearty counsel.
thine own friend and thy father s friend forsake not
Neither go into thy brother s house in the day of thy
calamity for better is a neighbour that is near than a
brother far off.
my son be wise and make my heart glad that I may answer him
that reproacheth me.
a prudent man foreseeth the evil and hideth himself but the
simple pass on and are punished.
take his garment that is surety for a stranger and take a
pledge of him for a strange woman.
he that blesseth his friend with a loud voice rising early in
the morning it shall be counted a curse to him.
a continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious
woman are alike.
whosoever hideth her hideth the wind and the ointment of his
right hand which bewrayeth itself.
Iron sharpeneth Iron so a man sharpeneth the countenance of
his friend.
whoso keepeth the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof so he
that waiteth on his Master shall be honoured.
as in water face answereth to face so the heart of man to
man.
hell and destruction are never full so the eyes of man are
never satisfied.
as the fining pot for Silver and the furnace for gold so is
a man to his praise.
though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with
a pestle yet will not his foolishness depart from him.
be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks and look
well to thy herds.
for Riches are not for ever and doth the crown endure to
every generation?
the hay appeareth and the tender grass sheweth itself and
herbs of the mountains are gathered.
the lambs are for thy clothing and the goats are the price of
the field.
and thou shalt have goats milk enough for thy food for the
food of thy household and for the maintenance for thy
maidens.
the wicked flee when no man pursueth but the righteous are
bold as a lion.
for the transgression of a land many are the princes thereof
but by a man of understanding and knowledge the state thereof
shall be prolonged.
a poor man that oppresseth the poor is like a sweeping rain
which leaveth no food.
they that forsake the law praise the wicked but such as keep
the law contend with them.
evil men understand not judgment but they that seek the lord
understand all things.
better is the poor that walketh in his uprightness than he
that is perverse in his ways though he be rich.
whoso keepeth the law is a wise son but he that is a
companion of riotous men shameth his father.
he that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance he
shall gather it for him that will pity the poor.
he that turneth away his ear from hearing the law even his
prayer shall be abomination.
whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil way he
shall fall himself into his own pit but the upright shall
have good things in possession.
the rich man is wise in his own conceit but the poor that
hath understanding searcheth him out.
when righteous men do rejoice there is great glory but when
the wicked rise a man is hidden.
he that covereth his sins shall not prosper but whoso
confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.
happy is the man that feareth alway but he that hardeneth his
heart shall fall into mischief.
as a roaring lion and a ranging bear so is a wicked ruler
over the poor people.
the prince that wanteth understanding is also a great
oppressor but he that hateth covetousness shall prolong his
days.
a man that doeth violence to the blood of any person shall
flee to the pit let no man stay him.
whoso walketh uprightly shall be saved but he that is
perverse in his ways shall fall at once.
he that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread but he
that followeth after vain persons shall have poverty enough.
a faithful man shall abound with blessings but he that maketh
haste to be rich shall not be innocent.
to have respect of persons is not good for for a piece of
bread that man will transgress.
he that hasteth to be rich hath an evil eye and considereth
not that poverty shall come upon him.
he that rebuketh a man afterwards shall find more favour than
he that flattereth with the tongue.
whoso robbeth his father or his mother and saith it is no
transgression the same is the companion of a destroyer.
he that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife but he that
putteth his trust in the lord shall be made fat.
he that trusteth in his own heart is a fool but whoso walketh
wisely he shall be delivered.
he that giveth unto the poor shall not lack but he that
hideth his eyes shall have many a curse.
when the wicked rise men hide themselves but when they
perish the righteous increase.
he that being often reproved hardeneth his neck shall
suddenly be destroyed and that without remedy.
when the righteous are in authority the people rejoice but
when the wicked beareth rule the people mourn.
whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father but he that keepeth
company with harlots spendeth his substance.
the king by judgment establisheth the land but he that
receiveth gifts overthroweth it.
a man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his
feet.
in the transgression of an evil man there is a snare but the
righteous doth sing and rejoice.
the righteous considereth the cause of the poor but the
wicked regardeth not to know it.
scornful men bring a city into a snare but wise men turn away
wrath.
if a wise man contendeth with a foolish man whether he rage
or laugh there is no rest.
the bloodthirsty hate the upright but the just seek his soul.
a fool uttereth all his mind but a wise man keepeth it in
till afterwards.
if a ruler hearken to lies all his servants are wicked.
the poor and the deceitful man meet together the lord
lighteneth both their eyes.
the king that faithfully judgeth the poor his throne shall be
established for ever.
the rod and reproof give wisdom but a child left to himself
bringeth his mother to shame.
when the wicked are multiplied transgression increaseth but
the righteous shall see their fall.
correct thy son and he shall give thee rest yea he shall
give delight unto thy soul.
where there is no vision the people perish but he that
keepeth the law happy is he.
a servant will not be corrected by words for though he
understand he will not answer.
seest thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more
hope of a fool than of him.
he that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child shall
have him become his son at the length.
an angry man stirreth up strife and a furious man aboundeth
in transgression.
a man s pride shall bring him low but honour shall uphold the
humble in spirit.
whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul he heareth
cursing and bewrayeth it not.
the fear of man bringeth a snare but whoso putteth his trust
in the lord shall be safe.
many seek the ruler s favour but every man s judgment cometh
from the lord.
an unjust man is an abomination to the just and he that is
upright in the way is abomination to the wicked.
the words of Agur the son of Jakeh even the prophecy the man
spake unto Ithiel even unto Ithiel and Ucal
surely I Am more brutish than any man and have not the
understanding of a man.
I Neither learned wisdom nor have the knowledge of the holy.
who hath ascended up into heaven or descended? who hath
gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a
garment? who hath established all the ends of the earth? what
is his name and what is his son s name if thou canst tell?
every word of God is pure he is a shield unto them that put
their trust in him.
add thou not unto his words lest he reprove thee and thou be
found a liar.
two things have I required of thee deny me them not before I
die
remove far from me vanity and lies give me Neither poverty
nor Riches feed me with food convenient for me
lest I be full and deny thee and say who is the lord? or
lest I be poor and steal and take the name of my God in
vain.
accuse not a servant unto his Master lest he curse thee and
thou be found guilty.
there is a generation that curseth their father and doth not
bless their mother.
there is a generation that are pure in their own eyes and yet
is not washed from their filthiness.
there is a generation O how lofty are their eyes and their
eyelids are lifted up.
there is a generation whose teeth are as swords and their
jaw teeth as knives to devour the poor from off the earth
and the needy from among men.
the horseleach hath two daughters crying give give. there
are three things that are never satisfied yea four things
say not it is enough
the grave and the barren womb the earth that is not filled
with water and the fire that saith not it is enough.
the eye that mocketh at his father and despiseth to obey his
mother the ravens of the valley shall pick it out and the
young eagles shall eat it.
there be three things which are too wonderful for me yea
four which I know not
the way of an eagle in the air the way of a serpent upon a
rock the way of a ship in the midst of the sea and the way
of a man with a maid.
such is the way of an adulterous woman she eateth and wipeth
her mouth and saith I have done no wickedness.
for three things the earth is disquieted and for four which
it cannot bear
for a servant when he reigneth and a fool when he is filled
with meat
for an odious woman when she is married and an handmaid that
is heir to her mistress.
there be four things which are little upon the earth but they
are exceeding wise
the ants are a people not strong yet they prepare their meat
in the summer
the conies are but a feeble folk yet make they their houses
in the rocks
the locusts have no king yet go they forth all of them by
Bands
the spider taketh hold with her hands and is in kings
palaces.
there be three things which go well yea four are comely in
going
a lion which is strongest among beasts and turneth not away
for any
a greyhound an he goat also and a king against whom there
is no rising up.
if thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself or if thou
hast thought evil lay thine hand upon thy mouth.
surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter and the
wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood so the forcing of
wrath bringeth forth strife.
the words of king Lemuel the prophecy that his mother taught
him.
what my son? and what the son of my womb? and what the son
of my vows?
give not thy strength unto women nor thy ways to that which
destroyeth kings.
it is not for kings O Lemuel it is not for kings to drink
wine nor for princes strong drink
lest they drink and forget the law and pervert the judgment
of any of the afflicted.
give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish and wine
unto those that be of heavy hearts.
let him drink and forget his poverty and remember his misery
no more.
open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all such as are
appointed to destruction.
open thy mouth judge righteously and plead the cause of the
poor and needy.
who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above
rubies.
the heart of her husband doth safely trust in her so that he
shall have no need of spoil.
she will do him good and not evil all the days of her life.
she seeketh wool and flax and worketh willingly with her
hands.
she is like the merchants ships she bringeth her food from
afar.
she riseth also while it is yet night and giveth meat to her
household and a portion to her maidens.
she considereth a field and buyeth it with the fruit of her
hands she planteth a vineyard.
she girdeth her loins with strength and strengtheneth her
arms.
she perceiveth that her merchandise is good her candle goeth
not out by night.
she layeth her hands to the spindle and her hands hold the
distaff.
she stretcheth out her hand to the poor yea she reacheth
forth her hands to the needy.
she is not afraid of the snow for her household for all her
household are clothed with scarlet.
she maketh herself coverings of tapestry her clothing is silk
and purple.
her husband is known in the gates when he sitteth among the
elders of the land.
she maketh fine linen and selleth it and delivereth girdles
unto the merchant.
strength and honour are her clothing and she shall rejoice in
time to come.
she openeth her mouth with wisdom and in her tongue is the
law of kindness.
she looketh well to the ways of her household and eateth not
the bread of idleness.
her children Arise up and call her blessed her husband also
and he praiseth her.
many daughters have done virtuously but thou excellest them
all.
favour is deceitful and beauty is vain but a woman that
feareth the lord she shall be praised.
give her of the fruit of her hands and let her own works
praise her in the gates.
the words of the preacher the son of David king in
Jerusalem.
vanity of vanities saith the preacher vanity of vanities
all is vanity.
what profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under
the sun?
one generation passeth away and another generation cometh
but the earth abideth for ever.
the sun also ariseth and the sun goeth down and hasteth to
his place where he arose.
the wind goeth toward the south and turneth about unto the
north it whirleth about continually and the wind returneth
again according to his circuits.
all the rivers run into the sea yet the sea is not full unto
the place from whence the rivers come thither they return
again.
all things are full of labour man cannot utter it the eye is
not satisfied with seeing nor the ear filled with hearing.
the thing that hath been it is that which shall be and that
which is done is that which shall be done and there is no new
thing under the sun.
is there any thing whereof it may be said see this is new?
it hath been already of old time which was before us.
there is no remembrance of former things Neither shall there
be any remembrance of things that are to come with those that
shall come after.
I the preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.
and I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom
concerning all things that are done under heaven this sore
travail hath God given to the sons of man to be exercised
therewith.
I have seen all the works that are done under the sun and
behold all is vanity and vexation of spirit.
that which is crooked cannot be made straight and that which
is wanting cannot be numbered.
I communed with mine own heart saying lo I Am come to great
estate and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have
been before me in Jerusalem yea my heart had great
experience of wisdom and knowledge.
and I gave my heart to know wisdom and to know madness and
folly I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.
for in Much wisdom is Much grief and he that increaseth
knowledge increaseth sorrow.
I said in mine heart go to now I will prove thee with mirth
therefore enjoy pleasure and behold this also is vanity.
I said of laughter it is mad and of mirth what doeth it?
I sought in mine heart to give myself unto wine yet
acquainting mine heart with wisdom and to lay hold on folly
till I might see what was that good for the sons of men which
they should do under the heaven all the days of their life.
I made me great works I builded me houses I planted me
vineyards
I made me gardens and orchards and I planted trees in them of
all kind of fruits
I made me pools of water to water therewith the wood that
bringeth forth trees
I got me servants and maidens and had servants born in my
house also I had great possessions of great and small cattle
above all that were in Jerusalem before me
I gathered me also Silver and gold and the peculiar treasure
of kings and of the provinces I gat me men singers and women
singers and the delights of the sons of men as musical
instruments and that of all sorts.
so I was great and increased more than all that were before
me in Jerusalem also my wisdom remained with me.
and whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them I
withheld not my heart from any joy for my heart rejoiced in
all my labour and this was my portion of all my labour.
then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought and
on the labour that I had laboured to do and behold all was
vanity and vexation of spirit and there was no profit under
the sun.
and I turned myself to behold wisdom and madness and folly
for what can the man do that cometh after the king? even that
which hath been already done.
then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly as far as light
excelleth darkness.
the wise man s eyes are in his head but the fool walketh in
darkness and I myself perceived also that one event happeneth
to them all.
then said I in my heart as it happeneth to the fool so it
happeneth even to me and why was I then more wise? then I
said in my heart that this also is vanity.
for there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool
for ever seeing that which now is in the days to come shall
all be forgotten. and how dieth the wise man? as the fool.
therefore I hated life because the work that is wrought under
the sun is grievous unto me for all is vanity and vexation of
spirit.
yea I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun
because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me.
and who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet
shall he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured
and wherein I have shewed myself wise under the sun. this is
also vanity.
therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the
labour which I took under the sun.
for there is a man whose labour is in wisdom and in
knowledge and in equity yet to a man that hath not laboured
therein shall he leave it for his portion. this also is vanity
and a great evil.
for what hath man of all his labour and of the vexation of
his heart wherein he hath laboured under the sun?
for all his days are sorrows and his travail grief yea his
heart taketh not rest in the night. this is also vanity.
there is nothing better for a man than that he should eat and
drink and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his
labour. this also I saw that it was from the hand of God.
for who can eat or who else can hasten hereunto more than I?
for God giveth to a man that is good in his sight wisdom and
knowledge and joy but to the sinner he giveth travail to
gather and to heap up that he may give to him that is good
before God. this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.
to every thing there is a season and a time to every purpose
under the heaven
a time to be born and a time to die a time to plant and a
time to pluck up that which is planted
a time to kill and a time to heal a time to break down and
a time to build up
a time to weep and a time to laugh a time to mourn and a
time to dance
a time to cast away stones and a time to gather stones
together a time to embrace and a time to refrain from
embracing
a time to get and a time to lose a time to keep and a time
to cast away
a time to rend and a time to sew a time to keep silence and
a time to speak
a time to love and a time to hate a time of war and a time
of peace.
what profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?
I have seen the travail which God hath given to the sons of
men to be exercised in it.
he hath made every thing beautiful in his time also he hath
set the world in their heart so that no man can find out the
work that God maketh from the beginning to the end.
I know that there is no good in them but for a man to
rejoice and to do good in his life.
and also that every man should eat and drink and enjoy the
good of all his labour it is the gift of God.
I know that whatsoever God doeth it shall be for ever
nothing can be put to it nor any thing taken from it and God
doeth it that men should fear before him.
that which hath been is now and that which is to be hath
already been and God requireth that which is past.
and moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment that
wickedness was there and the place of righteousness that
iniquity was there.
I said in mine heart God shall judge the righteous and the
wicked for there is a time there for every purpose and for
every work.
I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men
that God might manifest them and that they might see that
they themselves are beasts.
for that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts
even one thing befalleth them as the one dieth so dieth the
other yea they have all one breath so that a man hath no
preeminence above a beast for all is vanity.
all go unto one place all are of the dust and all turn to
dust again.
who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward and the
spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?
wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better than that a
man should rejoice in his own works for that is his portion
for who shall bring him to see what shall be after him?
so I returned and considered all the oppressions that are
done under the sun and behold the tears of such as were
oppressed and they had no comforter and on the side of their
oppressors there was power but they had no comforter.
wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than
the living which are yet alive.
yea better is he than both they which hath not yet been who
hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.
again I considered all travail and every right work that
for this a man is envied of his neighbour. this is also vanity
and vexation of spirit.
the fool foldeth his hands together and eateth his own flesh.
better is an handful with quietness than both the hands full
with travail and vexation of spirit.
then I returned and I saw vanity under the sun.
there is one alone and there is not a second yea he hath
Neither child nor brother yet is there no end of all his
labour Neither is his eye satisfied with Riches Neither
saith he for whom do I labour and bereave my soul of good?
this is also vanity yea it is a sore travail.
two are better than one because they have a good reward for
their labour.
for if they fall the one will lift up his fellow but woe to
him that is alone when he falleth for he hath not another to
help him up.
again if two lie together then they have heat but how can
one be warm alone?
and if one prevail against him two shall withstand him and a
threefold cord is not quickly broken.
better is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish
king who will no more be admonished.
for out of prison he cometh to reign whereas also he that is
born in his kingdom becometh poor.
I considered all the living which walk under the sun with the
second child that shall stand up in his stead.
there is no end of all the people even of all that have been
before them they also that come after shall not rejoice in
him. surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.
keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God and be more
ready to hear than to give the sacrifice of fools for they
consider not that they do evil.
be not rash with thy mouth and let not thine heart be hasty
to utter any thing before God for God is in heaven and thou
upon earth therefore let thy words be few.
for a dream cometh through the multitude of business and a
fool s voice is known by multitude of words.
when thou vowest a vow unto God defer not to pay it for he
hath no pleasure in fools pay that which thou hast vowed.
better is it that thou shouldest not vow than that thou
shouldest vow and not pay.
suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to Sin Neither say
thou before the angel that it was an error wherefore should
God be angry at thy voice and destroy the work of thine
hands?
for in the multitude of dreams and many words there are also
divers vanities but fear thou God.
if thou seest the oppression of the poor and violent
perverting of judgment and justice in a province marvel not
at the matter for he that is higher than the highest
regardeth and there be higher than they.
moreover the profit of the earth is for all the king himself
is served by the field.
he that loveth Silver shall not be satisfied with Silver nor
he that loveth abundance with increase this is also vanity.
when goods increase they are increased that eat them and
what good is there to the owners thereof saving the beholding
of them with their eyes?
the sleep of a labouring man is sweet whether he eat little
or Much but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to
sleep.
there is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun namely
Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.
but those Riches perish by evil travail and he begetteth a
son and there is nothing in his hand.
as he came forth of his mother s womb naked shall he return
to go as he came and shall take nothing of his labour which
he may carry away in his hand.
and this also is a sore evil that in all points as he came
so shall he go and what profit hath he that hath laboured for
the wind?
all his days also he eateth in darkness and he hath Much
sorrow and wrath with his sickness.
behold that which I have seen it is good and comely for one
to eat and to drink and to enjoy the good of all his labour
that he taketh under the sun all the days of his life which
God giveth him for it is his portion.
every man also to whom God hath given Riches and wealth and
hath given him power to eat thereof and to take his portion
and to rejoice in his labour this is the gift of God.
for he shall not Much remember the days of his life because
God answereth him in the joy of his heart.
there is an evil which I have seen under the sun and it is
common among men
a man to whom God hath given Riches wealth and honour so
that he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he desireth
yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof but a stranger
eateth it this is vanity and it is an evil disease.
if a man beget an hundred children and live many years so
that the days of his years be many and his soul be not filled
with good and also that he have no burial I say that an
untimely birth is better than he.
for he cometh in with vanity and departeth in darkness and
his name shall be covered with darkness.
moreover he hath not seen the sun nor known any thing this
hath more rest than the other.
yea though he live a thousand years twice told yet hath he
seen no good do not all go to one place?
all the labour of man is for his mouth and yet the appetite
is not filled.
for what hath the wise more than the fool? what hath the poor
that knoweth to walk before the living?
better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the
desire this is also vanity and vexation of spirit.
that which hath been is named already and it is known that it
is man Neither may he contend with him that is mightier than
he.
seeing there be many things that increase vanity what is man
the better?
for who knoweth what is good for man in this life all the
days of his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow? for who
can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?
a good name is better than precious ointment and the day of
death than the day of one s birth.
it is better to go to the house of mourning than to go to the
house of feasting for that is the end of all men and the
living will lay it to his heart.
sorrow is better than laughter for by the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better.
the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning but the
heart of fools is in the house of mirth.
it is better to hear the rebuke of the wise than for a man to
hear the song of fools.
for as the crackling of thorns under a pot so is the laughter
of the fool this also is vanity.
surely oppression maketh a wise man mad and a gift destroyeth
the heart.
better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof and
the patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.
be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry for anger resteth in
the bosom of fools.
say not thou what is the cause that the former days were
better than these? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning
this.
wisdom is good with an inheritance and by it there is profit
to them that see the sun.
for wisdom is a defence and money is a defence but the
excellency of knowledge is that wisdom giveth life to them
that have it.
consider the work of God for who can make that straight
which he hath made crooked?
in the day of prosperity be joyful but in the day of
adversity consider God also hath set the one over against the
other to the end that man should find nothing after him.
all things have I seen in the days of my vanity there is a
just man that perisheth in his righteousness and there is a
wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.
be not righteous over Much Neither make thyself over wise
why shouldest thou destroy thyself?
be not over Much wicked Neither be thou foolish why
shouldest thou die before thy time?
it is good that thou shouldest take hold of this yea also
from this withdraw not thine hand for he that feareth God
shall come forth of them all.
wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than Ten Mighty men which
are in the city.
for there is not a just man upon earth that doeth good and
sinneth not.
also take no heed unto all words that are spoken lest thou
hear thy servant curse thee
for oftentimes also thine own heart knoweth that thou thyself
likewise hast cursed others.
all this have I proved by wisdom I said I will be wise but
it was far from me.
that which is far off and exceeding deep who can find it
out?
I applied mine heart to know and to search and to seek out
wisdom and the reason of things and to know the wickedness
of folly even of foolishness and madness
and I find more bitter than death the woman whose heart is
snares and nets and her hands as Bands whoso pleaseth God
shall escape from her but the sinner shall be taken by her.
behold this have I found saith the preacher counting one by
one to find out the account
which yet my soul seeketh but I find not one man among a
thousand have I found but a woman among all those have I not
found.
lo this only have I found that God hath made man upright
but they have sought out many inventions.
who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of
a thing? a man s wisdom maketh his face to shine and the
boldness of his face shall be changed.
I counsel thee to keep the king s commandment and that in
regard of the oath of God.
be not hasty to go out of his sight stand not in an evil
thing for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him.
where the word of a king is there is power and who may say
unto him what doest thou?
whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no evil thing and a
wise man s heart discerneth both time and judgment.
because to every purpose there is time and judgment therefore
the misery of man is great upon him.
for he knoweth not that which shall be for who can tell him
when it shall be?
there is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the
spirit Neither hath he power in the day of death and there
is no discharge in that war Neither shall wickedness deliver
those that are given to it.
all this have I seen and applied my heart unto every work
that is done under the sun there is a time wherein one man
ruleth over another to his own hurt.
and so I saw the wicked buried who had come and gone from the
place of the holy and they were forgotten in the city where
they had so done this is also vanity.
because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set
in them to do evil.
though a sinner do evil an hundred times and his days be
prolonged yet surely I know that it shall be well with them
that fear God which fear before him
but it shall not be well with the wicked Neither shall he
prolong his days which are as a shadow because he feareth
not before God.
there is a vanity which is done upon the earth that there be
just men unto whom it happeneth according to the work of the
wicked again there be wicked men to whom it happeneth
according to the work of the righteous I said that this also
is vanity.
then I commended mirth because a man hath no better thing
under the sun than to eat and to drink and to be merry for
that shall abide with him of his labour the days of his life
which God giveth him under the sun.
when I applied mine heart to know wisdom and to see the
business that is done upon the earth for also there is that
Neither day nor night seeth sleep with his eyes
then I beheld all the work of God that a man cannot find out
the work that is done under the sun because though a man
labour to seek it out yet he shall not find it yea farther
though a wise man think to know it yet shall he not be able
to find it.
for all this I considered in my heart even to declare all
this that the righteous and the wise and their works are
in the hand of God no man knoweth either love or hatred by
all that is before them.
all things come alike to all there is one event to the
righteous and to the wicked to the good and to the clean
and to the unclean to him that sacrificeth and to him that
sacrificeth not as is the good so is the sinner and he that
sweareth as he that feareth an oath.
this is an evil among all things that are done under the sun
that there is one event unto all yea also the heart of the
sons of men is full of evil and madness is in their heart
while they live and after that they go to the dead.
for to him that is joined to all the living there is hope for
a living dog is better than a dead lion.
for the living know that they shall die but the dead know not
any thing Neither have they any more a reward for the memory
of them is forgotten.
also their love and their hatred and their envy is now
perished Neither have they any more a portion for ever in any
thing that is done under the sun.
go thy way eat thy bread with joy and drink thy wine with a
merry heart for God now accepteth thy works.
let thy garments be always white and let thy head lack no
ointment.
live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of
the life of thy vanity which he hath given thee under the
sun all the days of thy vanity for that is thy portion in
this life and in thy labour which thou takest under the sun.
whatsoever thy hand findeth to do do it with thy might for
there is no work nor device nor knowledge nor wisdom in
the grave whither thou goest.
I returned and saw under the sun that the race is not to the
swift nor the battle to the strong Neither yet bread to the
wise nor yet Riches to men of understanding nor yet favour
to men of skill but time and chance happeneth to them all.
for man also knoweth not his time as the fishes that are
taken in an evil net and as the birds that are caught in the
snare so are the sons of men snared in an evil time when it
falleth suddenly upon them.
this wisdom have I seen also under the sun and it seemed
great unto me
there was a little city and few men within it and there came
a great king against it and besieged it and built great
bulwarks against it
now there was found in it a poor wise man and he by his
wisdom delivered the city yet no man remembered that same
poor man.
then said I wisdom is better than strength nevertheless the
poor man s wisdom is despised and his words are not heard.
the words of wise men are heard in quiet more than the cry of
him that ruleth among fools.
wisdom is better than weapons of war but one sinner
destroyeth Much good.
dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth
a stinking savour so doth a little folly him that is in
reputation for wisdom and honour.
a wise man s heart is at his right hand but a fool s heart at
his left.
yea also when he that is a fool walketh by the way his
wisdom faileth him and he saith to every one that he is a
fool.
if the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee leave not thy
place for yielding pacifieth great offences.
there is an evil which I have seen under the sun as an error
which proceedeth from the ruler
folly is set in great dignity and the rich sit in low place.
I have seen servants upon horses and princes walking as
servants upon the earth.
he that diggeth a pit shall fall into it and whoso breaketh
an hedge a serpent shall bite him.
whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith and he that
cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby.
if the Iron be blunt and he do not whet the edge then must
he put to more strength but wisdom is profitable to direct.
surely the serpent will bite without enchantment and a
babbler is no better.
the words of a wise man s mouth are gracious but the lips of
a fool will swallow up himself.
the beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness and
the end of his talk is mischievous madness.
a fool also is full of words a man cannot tell what shall be
and what shall be after him who can tell him?
the labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them because
he knoweth not how to go to the city.
woe to thee O land when thy king is a child and thy princes
eat in the morning
blessed art thou O land when thy king is the son of nobles
and thy princes eat in due season for strength and not for
drunkenness
by Much slothfulness the building decayeth and through
idleness of the hands the house droppeth through.
a feast is made for laughter and wine maketh merry but money
answereth all things.
curse not the king no not in thy thought and curse not the
rich in thy bedchamber for a bird of the air shall carry the
voice and that which hath wings shall tell the matter.
cast thy bread upon the waters for thou shalt find it after
many days.
give a portion to seven and also to eight for thou knowest
not what evil shall be upon the earth.
if the clouds be full of rain they empty themselves upon the
earth and if the tree fall toward the south or toward the
north in the place where the tree falleth there it shall be.
he that observeth the wind shall not sow and he that
regardeth the clouds shall not reap.
as thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit nor how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child even so
thou knowest not the works of God who maketh all.
in the morning sow thy seed and in the evening withhold not
thine hand for thou knowest not whether shall prosper either
this or that or whether they both shall be alike good.
truly the light is sweet and a pleasant thing it is for the
eyes to behold the sun
but if a man live many years and rejoice in them all yet let
him remember the days of darkness for they shall be many. all
that cometh is vanity.
rejoice O young man in thy youth and let thy heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth and walk in the ways of thine
heart and in the sight of thine eyes but know thou that for
all these things God will bring thee into judgment.
therefore remove sorrow from thy heart and put away evil from
thy flesh for childhood and youth are vanity.
remember now thy creator in the days of thy youth while the
evil days come not nor the years draw nigh when thou shalt
say I have no pleasure in them
while the sun or the light or the moon or the stars be not
darkened nor the clouds return after the rain
in the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble and
the strong men shall bow themselves and the grinders cease
because they are few and those that look out of the windows
be darkened
and the doors shall be shut in the streets when the sound of
the grinding is low and he shall rise up at the voice of the
bird and all the daughters of musick shall be brought low
also when they shall be afraid of that which is high and
fears shall be in the way and the almond tree shall flourish
and the grasshopper shall be a burden and desire shall fail
because man goeth to his long home and the mourners go about
the streets
or ever the Silver cord be loosed or the golden bowl be
broken or the pitcher be broken at the fountain or the wheel
broken at the cistern.
then shall the dust return to the earth as it was and the
spirit shall return unto God who gave it.
vanity of vanities saith the preacher all is vanity.
and moreover because the preacher was wise he still taught
the people knowledge yea he gave good heed and sought out
and set in order many proverbs.
the preacher sought to find out acceptable words and that
which was written was upright even words of truth.
the words of the wise are as goads and as nails fastened by
the masters of assemblies which are given from one Shepherd.
and further by these my son be admonished of making many
books there is no end and Much study is a weariness of the
flesh.
let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter fear God and
keep his commandments for this is the whole duty of man.
for God shall bring every work into judgment with every
secret thing whether it be good or whether it be evil.
the song of songs which is Solomon s.
let him Kiss me with the kisses of his mouth for thy love is
better than wine.
because of the savour of thy good ointments thy name is as
ointment poured forth therefore do the virgins love thee.
draw me we will run after thee the king hath brought me into
his chambers we will be glad and rejoice in thee we will
remember thy love more than wine the upright love thee.
I Am black but comely O ye daughters of Jerusalem as the
tents of Kedar as the curtains of Solomon.
look not upon me because I Am black because the sun hath
looked upon me my mother s children were angry with me they
made me the keeper of the vineyards but mine own vineyard
have I not kept.
tell me O thou whom my soul loveth where thou feedest where
thou makest thy flock to rest at noon for why should I be as
one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions?
if thou know not O thou fairest among women go thy way forth
by the footsteps of the flock and feed thy kids beside the
shepherds tents.
I have compared thee O my love to a company of horses in
Pharaoh s chariots.
thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels thy neck with
chains of gold.
we will make thee borders of gold with studs of Silver.
while the king sitteth at his table my spikenard sendeth
forth the smell thereof.
a bundle of myrrh is my well-beloved unto me he shall lie all
night betwixt my breasts.
my beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphire in the
vineyards of Engedi.
behold thou art fair my love behold thou art fair thou
hast doves eyes.
behold thou art fair my beloved yea pleasant also our bed
is green.
the beams of our house are cedar and our rafters of fir.
I Am the rose of Sharon and the lily of the valleys.
as the lily among thorns so is my love among the daughters.
as the apple tree among the trees of the wood so is my
beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great
delight and his fruit was sweet to my taste.
he brought me to the banqueting house and his banner over me
was love.
stay me with flagons comfort me with apples for I Am sick of
love.
his left hand is under my head and his right hand doth
embrace me.
I charge you O ye daughters of Jerusalem by the roes and by
the hinds of the field that ye stir not up nor awake my
love till he please.
the voice of my beloved behold he cometh leaping upon the
mountains skipping upon the hills.
my beloved is like a roe or a young hart behold he standeth
behind our wall he looketh forth at the windows shewing
himself through the lattice.
my beloved spake and said unto me rise up my love my fair
one and come away.
for lo the winter is past the rain is over and gone
the flowers appear on the earth the time of the singing of
birds is come and the voice of the turtle is heard in our
land
the fig tree putteth forth her green figs and the vines with
the tender grape give a good smell. Arise my love my fair
one and come away.
O my dove that art in the clefts of the rock in the secret
places of the stairs let me see thy countenance let me hear
thy voice for sweet is thy voice and thy countenance is
comely.
take us the foxes the little foxes that spoil the vines for
our vines have tender grapes.
my beloved is mine and I Am his he feedeth among the lilies.
until the day break and the shadows flee away turn my
beloved and be thou like a roe or a young hart upon the
mountains of Bether.
by night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth I sought
him but I found him not.
I will rise now and go about the city in the streets and in
the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth I sought
him but I found him not.
the watchmen that go about the city found me to whom I said
saw ye him whom my soul loveth?
it was but a little that I passed from them but I found him
whom my soul loveth I held him and would not let him go
until I had brought him into my mother s house and into the
chamber of her that conceived me.
I charge you O ye daughters of Jerusalem by the roes and by
the hinds of the field that ye stir not up nor awake my
love till he please.
who is this that cometh out of the wilderness like pillars of
smoke perfumed with myrrh and frankincense with all powders
of the merchant?
behold his bed which is Solomon s threescore valiant men are
about it of the valiant of Israel.
they all hold swords being expert in war every man hath his
sword upon his thigh because of fear in the night.
king Solomon made himself a chariot of the wood of Lebanon.
he made the pillars thereof of Silver the bottom thereof of
gold the covering of it of purple the midst thereof being
paved with love for the daughters of Jerusalem.
go forth O ye daughters of Zion and behold king Solomon with
the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his
espousals and in the day of the gladness of his heart.
behold thou art fair my love behold thou art fair thou
hast doves eyes within thy locks thy hair is as a flock of
goats that appear from mount Gilead.
thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn which
came up from the washing whereof every one bear twins and
none is barren among them.
thy lips are like a thread of scarlet and thy speech is
comely thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within
thy locks.
thy neck is like the tower of David builded for an armoury
whereon there hang a thousand bucklers all shields of Mighty
men.
thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins which
feed among the lilies.
until the day break and the shadows flee away I will get me
to the mountain of myrrh and to the hill of frankincense.
thou art all fair my love there is no spot in thee.
come with me from Lebanon my spouse with me from Lebanon
look from the top of Amana from the top of Shenir and Hermon
from the lions dens from the mountains of the leopards.
thou hast ravished my heart my sister my spouse thou hast
ravished my heart with one of thine eyes with one chain of
thy neck.
how fair is thy love my sister my spouse how Much better is
thy love than wine and the smell of thine ointments than all
spices
thy lips O my spouse drop as the honeycomb honey and milk
are under thy tongue and the smell of thy garments is like
the smell of Lebanon.
a garden inclosed is my sister my spouse a spring shut up a
fountain sealed.
thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates with pleasant
fruits camphire with spikenard
spikenard and saffron calamus and cinnamon with all trees of
frankincense myrrh and aloes with all the chief spices
a fountain of gardens a well of living waters and streams
from Lebanon.
awake O north wind and come thou south blow upon my
garden that the spices thereof may flow out. let my beloved
come into his garden and eat his pleasant fruits.
I Am come into my garden my sister my spouse I have
gathered my myrrh with my spice I have eaten my honeycomb
with my honey I have drunk my wine with my milk eat O
friends drink yea drink abundantly O beloved.
I sleep but my heart waketh it is the voice of my beloved
that knocketh saying open to me my sister my love my
dove my undefiled for my head is filled with dew and my
locks with the drops of the night.
I have put off my coat how shall I put it on? I have washed
my feet how shall I defile them?
my beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door and my
bowels were moved for him.
I rose up to open to my beloved and my hands dropped with
myrrh and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh upon the
handles of the lock.
I opened to my beloved but my beloved had withdrawn himself
and was gone my soul failed when he spake I sought him but
I could not find him I called him but he gave me no answer.
the watchmen that went about the city found me they smote me
they wounded me the keepers of the walls took away my veil
from me.
I charge you O daughters of Jerusalem if ye find my beloved
that ye tell him that I Am sick of love.
what is thy beloved more than another beloved O thou fairest
among women? what is thy beloved more than another beloved
that thou dost so charge us?
my beloved is white and ruddy the chiefest among Ten
thousand.
his head is as the most fine gold his locks are bushy and
black as a raven.
his eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters
washed with milk and fitly set.
his cheeks are as a bed of spices as sweet flowers his lips
like lilies dropping sweet smelling myrrh.
his hands are as gold rings set with the beryl his belly is
as bright ivory overlaid with sapphires.
his legs are as pillars of marble set upon sockets of fine
gold his countenance is as Lebanon excellent as the cedars.
his mouth is most sweet yea he is altogether lovely. this is
my beloved and this is my friend O daughters of Jerusalem.
whither is thy beloved gone O thou fairest among women?
whither is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with
thee.
my beloved is gone down into his garden to the beds of
spices to feed in the gardens and to gather lilies.
I Am my beloved s and my beloved is mine he feedeth among
the lilies.
thou art beautiful O my love as Tirzah comely as Jerusalem
terrible as an army with banners.
turn away thine eyes from me for they have overcome me thy
hair is as a flock of goats that appear from Gilead.
thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the
washing whereof every one beareth twins and there is not one
barren among them.
as a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks.
there are threescore queens and fourscore concubines and
virgins without number.
my dove my undefiled is but one she is the only one of her
mother she is the choice one of her that bare her. the
daughters saw her and blessed her yea the queens and the
concubines and they praised her.
who is she that looketh forth as the morning fair as the
moon clear as the sun and terrible as an army with banners?
I went down into the garden of nuts to see the fruits of the
valley and to see whether the vine flourished and the
pomegranates budded.
or ever I was aware my soul made me like the chariots of
Amminadib.
return return O Shulamite return return that we may look
upon thee. what will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the
company of two armies.
how beautiful are thy feet with shoes O prince s daughter
the joints of thy thighs are like jewels the work of the
hands of a cunning workman.
thy navel is like a round goblet which wanteth not liquor
thy belly is like an heap of wheat set about with lilies.
thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins.
thy neck is as a tower of ivory thine eyes like the fishpools
in Heshbon by the gate of Bathrabbim thy nose is as the
tower of Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus.
thine head upon thee is like Carmel and the hair of thine
head like purple the king is held in the galleries.
how fair and how pleasant art thou O love for delights
this thy stature is like to a palm tree and thy breasts to
clusters of grapes.
I said I will go up to the palm tree I will take hold of the
boughs thereof now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of
the vine and the smell of thy nose like apples
and the roof of thy mouth like the best wine for my beloved
that goeth down sweetly causing the lips of those that are
asleep to speak.
I Am my beloved s and his desire is toward me.
come my beloved let us go forth into the field let us lodge
in the villages.
let us get up early to the vineyards let us see if the vine
flourish whether the tender grape appear and the
pomegranates bud forth there will I give thee my loves.
the mandrakes give a smell and at our gates are all manner of
pleasant fruits new and old which I have laid up for thee O
my beloved.
O that thou wert as my brother that sucked the breasts of my
mother when I should find thee without I would Kiss thee
yea I should not be despised.
I would lead thee and bring thee into my mother s house who
would instruct me I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine
of the juice of my pomegranate.
his left hand should be under my head and his right hand
should embrace me.
I charge you O daughters of Jerusalem that ye stir not up
nor awake my love until he please.
who is this that cometh up from the wilderness leaning upon
her beloved? I raised thee up under the apple tree there thy
mother brought thee forth there she brought thee forth that
bare thee.
set me as a seal upon thine heart as a seal upon thine arm
for love is strong as death jealousy is cruel as the grave
the coals thereof are coals of fire which hath a most
vehement flame.
many waters cannot quench love Neither can the floods drown
it if a man would give all the substance of his house for
love it would utterly be contemned.
we have a little sister and she hath no breasts what shall
we do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?
if she be a wall we will build upon her a palace of Silver
and if she be a door we will inclose her with boards of
cedar.
I Am a wall and my breasts like towers then was I in his
eyes as one that found favour.
Solomon had a vineyard at Baalhamon he let out the vineyard
unto keepers every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a
thousand pieces of Silver.
my vineyard which is mine is before me thou O Solomon
must have a thousand and those that keep the fruit thereof
two hundred.
thou that dwellest in the gardens the companions hearken to
thy voice cause me to hear it.
make haste my beloved and be thou like to a roe or to a
young hart upon the mountains of spices.
the vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz which he saw concerning
Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah Jotham Ahaz and
Hezekiah kings of Judah.
hear O heavens and give ear O earth for the lord hath
spoken I have nourished and brought up children and they
have rebelled against me.
the ox knoweth his owner and the ass his Master s crib but
Israel doth not know my people doth not consider.
ah sinful nation a people laden with iniquity a seed of
evildoers children that are corrupters they have forsaken
the lord they have provoked the holy one of Israel unto
anger they are gone away backward.
why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and
more the whole head is sick and the whole heart faint.
from the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no
soundness in it but wounds and bruises and putrifying
sores they have not been closed Neither bound up Neither
mollified with ointment.
your country is desolate your cities are burned with fire
your land strangers devour it in your presence and it is
desolate as overthrown by strangers.
and the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard
as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers as a besieged city.
except the lord of hosts had left unto us a very small
remnant we should have been as Sodom and we should have been
like unto Gomorrah.
hear the word of the lord ye rulers of Sodom give ear unto
the law of our God ye people of Gomorrah.
to what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me?
saith the lord I Am full of the burnt offerings of rams and
the fat of fed beasts and I delight not in the blood of
bullocks or of lambs or of he goats.
when ye come to appear before me who hath required this at
your hand to tread my courts?
bring no more vain oblations incense is an abomination unto
me the new moons and sabbaths the calling of assemblies I
cannot away with it is iniquity even the solemn meeting.
your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth they
are a trouble unto me I Am weary to bear them.
and when ye spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes
from you yea when ye make many prayers I will not hear
your hands are full of blood.
wash you make you clean put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes cease to do evil
learn to do well seek judgment relieve the oppressed judge
the fatherless plead for the widow.
come now and let us reason together saith the lord though
your sins be as scarlet they shall be as white as snow
though they be red like crimson they shall be as wool.
if ye be willing and obedient ye shall eat the good of the
land
but if ye refuse and rebel ye shall be devoured with the
sword for the mouth of the lord hath spoken it.
how is the faithful city become an harlot it was full of
judgment righteousness lodged in it but now murderers.
thy Silver is become dross thy wine mixed with water
thy princes are rebellious and companions of thieves every
one loveth gifts and followeth after rewards they judge not
the fatherless Neither doth the cause of the widow come unto
them.
therefore saith the lord the lord of hosts the Mighty one of
Israel ah I will ease me of mine adversaries and avenge me
of mine enemies
and I will turn my hand upon thee and purely purge away thy
dross and take away all thy tin
and I will restore thy judges as at the first and thy
counsellors as at the beginning afterward thou shalt be
called the city of righteousness the faithful city.
Zion shall be redeemed with judgment and her converts with
righteousness.
and the destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners
shall be together and they that forsake the lord shall be
consumed.
for they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired
and ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have
chosen.
for ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth and as a garden
that hath no water.
and the strong shall be as tow and the maker of it as a
spark and they shall both burn together and none shall
quench them.
the word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and
Jerusalem.
and it shall come to pass in the last days that the mountain
of the lord s house shall be established in the top of the
mountains and shall be exalted above the hills and all
nations shall flow unto it.
and many people shall go and say come ye and let us go up to
the mountain of the lord to the house of the God of Jacob
and he will teach us of his ways and we will walk in his
paths for out of Zion shall go forth the law and the word of
the lord from Jerusalem.
and he shall judge among the nations and shall rebuke many
people and they shall beat their swords into plowshares and
their spears into pruninghooks nation shall not lift up sword
against nation Neither shall they learn war any more.
O house of Jacob come ye and let us walk in the light of the
lord.
therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob
because they be replenished from the east and are soothsayers
like the Philistines and they please themselves in the
children of strangers.
their land also is full of Silver and gold Neither is there
any end of their treasures their land is also full of horses
Neither is there any end of their chariots
their land also is full of idols they worship the work of
their own hands that which their own fingers have made
and the mean man boweth down and the great man humbleth
himself therefore forgive them not.
enter into the rock and hide thee in the dust for fear of
the lord and for the glory of his majesty.
the lofty looks of man shall be humbled and the haughtiness
of men shall be bowed down and the lord alone shall be
exalted in that day.
for the day of the lord of hosts shall be upon every one that
is proud and lofty and upon every one that is lifted up and
he shall be brought low
and upon all the cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted
up and upon all the oaks of Bashan
and upon all the high mountains and upon all the hills that
are lifted up
and upon every high tower and upon every fenced wall
and upon all the ships of Tarshish and upon all pleasant
pictures.
and the loftiness of man shall be bowed down and the
haughtiness of men shall be made low and the lord alone shall
be exalted in that day.
and the idols he shall utterly abolish.
and they shall go into the holes of the rocks and into the
caves of the earth for fear of the lord and for the glory of
his majesty when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.
in that day a man shall cast his idols of Silver and his
idols of gold which they made each one for himself to
worship to the moles and to the bats
to go into the clefts of the rocks and into the tops of the
ragged rocks for fear of the lord and for the glory of his
majesty when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.
cease ye from man whose breath is in his nostrils for
wherein is he to be accounted of?
for behold the lord the lord of hosts doth take away from
Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the staff the whole
stay of bread and the whole stay of water.
the Mighty man and the man of war the judge and the
prophet and the prudent and the ancient
the captain of fifty and the honourable man and the
counsellor and the cunning artificer and the eloquent
orator.
and I will give children to be their princes and babes shall
rule over them.
and the people shall be oppressed every one by another and
every one by his neighbour the child shall behave himself
proudly against the ancient and the base against the
honourable.
when a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his
father saying thou hast clothing be thou our ruler and let
this ruin be under thy hand
in that day shall he swear saying I will not be an healer
for in my house is Neither bread nor clothing make me not a
ruler of the people.
for Jerusalem is ruined and Judah is fallen because their
tongue and their doings are against the lord to provoke the
eyes of his glory.
the shew of their countenance doth witness against them and
they declare their Sin as Sodom they hide it not. woe unto
their soul for they have rewarded evil unto themselves.
say ye to the righteous that it shall be well with him for
they shall eat the fruit of their doings.
woe unto the wicked it shall be ill with him for the reward
of his hands shall be given him.
as for my people children are their oppressors and women
rule over them. O my people they which lead thee cause thee
to err and destroy the way of thy paths.
the lord standeth up to plead and standeth to judge the
people.
the lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his
people and the princes thereof for ye have eaten up the
vineyard the spoil of the poor is in your houses.
what mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces and grind the
faces of the poor? saith the lord God of hosts.
moreover the lord saith because the daughters of Zion are
haughty and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes
walking and mincing as they go and making a tinkling with
their feet
therefore the lord will smite with a scab the crown of the
head of the daughters of Zion and the lord will discover
their secret parts.
in that day the lord will take away the bravery of their
tinkling ornaments about their feet and their cauls and
their round tires like the moon
the chains and the bracelets and the mufflers
the bonnets and the ornaments of the legs and the headbands
and the tablets and the earrings
the rings and nose jewels
the changeable suits of apparel and the mantles and the
wimples and the crisping pins
the glasses and the fine linen and the hoods and the vails.
and it shall come to pass that instead of sweet smell there
shall be stink and instead of a girdle a rent and instead of
well set hair baldness and instead of a stomacher a girding
of sackcloth and burning instead of beauty.
thy men shall fall by the sword and thy Mighty in the war.
and her gates shall lament and mourn and she being desolate
shall sit upon the ground.
and in that day seven women shall take hold of one man
saying we will eat our own bread and wear our own apparel
only let us be called by thy name to take away our reproach.
in that day shall the branch of the lord be beautiful and
glorious and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and
comely for them that are escaped of Israel.
and it shall come to pass that he that is left in Zion and
he that remaineth in Jerusalem shall be called holy even
every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem
when the lord shall have washed away the filth of the
daughters of Zion and shall have purged the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment
and by the spirit of burning.
and the lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount
Zion and upon her assemblies a cloud and smoke by day and
the shining of a flaming fire by night for upon all the glory
shall be a defence.
and there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time
from the heat and for a place of refuge and for a covert
from storm and from rain.
now will I sing to my wellbeloved a song of my beloved
touching his vineyard. my wellbeloved hath a vineyard in a
very fruitful hill
and he fenced it and gathered out the stones thereof and
planted it with the choicest vine and built a tower in the
midst of it and also made a winepress therein and he looked
that it should bring forth grapes and it brought forth wild
grapes.
and now O inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah judge
I pray you betwixt me and my vineyard.
what could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not
done in it? wherefore when I looked that it should bring
forth grapes brought it forth wild grapes?
and now go to I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard
I will take away the hedge thereof and it shall be eaten up
and break down the wall thereof and it shall be trodden down
and I will lay it waste it shall not be pruned nor digged
but there shall come up briers and thorns I will also command
the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.
for the vineyard of the lord of hosts is the house of Israel
and the men of Judah his pleasant plant and he looked for
judgment but behold oppression for righteousness but behold
a cry.
woe unto them that join house to house that lay field to
field till there be no place that they may be placed alone
in the midst of the earth
in mine ears said the lord of hosts of a truth many houses
shall be desolate even great and fair without inhabitant.
yea Ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath and the seed
of an homer shall yield an Ephah.
woe unto them that rise up early in the morning that they may
follow strong drink that continue until night till wine
inflame them
and the harp and the viol the tabret and pipe and wine
are in their feasts but they regard not the work of the lord
Neither consider the operation of his hands.
therefore my people are gone into captivity because they have
no knowledge and their honourable men are famished and their
multitude dried up with thirst.
therefore hell hath enlarged herself and opened her mouth
without measure and their glory and their multitude and
their pomp and he that rejoiceth shall descend into it.
and the mean man shall be brought down and the Mighty man
shall be humbled and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled
but the lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment and God
that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness.
then shall the lambs feed after their manner and the waste
places of the fat ones shall strangers eat.
woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity and Sin
as it were with a cart rope
that say let him make speed and hasten his work that we may
see it and let the counsel of the holy one of Israel draw
nigh and come that we may know it
woe unto them that call evil good and good evil that put
darkness for light and light for darkness that put bitter
for sweet and sweet for bitter
woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes and prudent in
their own sight
woe unto them that are Mighty to drink wine and men of
strength to mingle strong drink
which justify the wicked for reward and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him
therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble and the flame
consumeth the chaff so their root shall be as rottenness and
their blossom shall go up as dust because they have cast away
the law of the lord of hosts and despised the word of the
holy one of Israel.
therefore is the anger of the lord kindled against his people
and he hath stretched forth his hand against them and hath
smitten them and the hills did tremble and their carcases
were torn in the midst of the streets. for all this his anger
is not turned away but his hand is stretched out still.
and he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far and
will hiss unto them from the end of the earth and behold
they shall come with speed swiftly
none shall be weary nor stumble among them none shall slumber
nor sleep Neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed
nor the latchet of their shoes be broken
whose arrows are Sharp and all their bows bent their horses
hoofs shall be counted like flint and their wheels like a
whirlwind
their roaring shall be like a lion they shall roar like young
lions yea they shall roar and lay hold of the prey and
shall carry it away safe and none shall deliver it.
and in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring
of the sea and if one look unto the land behold darkness and
sorrow and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof.
in the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the lord sitting
upon a throne high and lifted up and his train filled the
temple.
above it stood the seraphims each one had six wings with
twain he covered his face and with twain he covered his feet
and with twain he did fly.
and one cried unto another and said holy holy holy is the
lord of hosts the whole earth is full of his glory.
and the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that
cried and the house was filled with smoke.
then said I woe is me for I Am undone because I Am a man of
unclean lips and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean
lips for mine eyes have seen the king the lord of hosts.
then flew one of the seraphims unto me having a live coal in
his hand which he had taken with the tongs from off the
altar
and he laid it upon my mouth and said lo this hath touched
thy lips and thine iniquity is taken away and thy Sin
purged.
also I heard the voice of the lord saying whom shall I send
and who will go for us? then said I here Am I send me.
and he said go and tell this people hear ye indeed but
understand not and see ye indeed but perceive not.
make the heart of this people fat and make their ears heavy
and shut their eyes lest they see with their eyes and hear
with their ears and understand with their heart and convert
and be healed.
then said I lord how long? and he answered until the cities
be wasted without inhabitant and the houses without man and
the land be utterly desolate
and the lord have removed men far away and there be a great
forsaking in the midst of the land.
but yet in it shall be a tenth and it shall return and shall
be eaten as a teil tree and as an oak whose substance is in
them when they cast their leaves so the holy seed shall be
the substance thereof.
and it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham the
son of Uzziah king of Judah that Rezin the king of Syria
and Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel went up toward
Jerusalem to war against it but could not prevail against it.
and it was told the house of David saying Syria is
confederate with Ephraim. and his heart was moved and the
heart of his people as the trees of the wood are moved with
the wind.
then said the lord unto Isaiah go forth now to meet Ahaz
thou and Shearjashub thy son at the end of the conduit of
the upper pool in the highway of the fuller s field
and say unto him take heed and be quiet fear not Neither
be fainthearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands
for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria and of the son of
Remaliah.
because Syria Ephraim and the son of Remaliah have taken
evil counsel against thee saying
let us go up against Judah and vex it and let us make a
breach therein for us and set a king in the midst of it even
the son of Tabeal
thus saith the lord God it shall not stand Neither shall it
come to pass.
for the head of Syria is Damascus and the head of Damascus is
Rezin and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be
broken that it be not a people.
and the head of Ephraim is Samaria and the head of Samaria is
Remaliah s son. if ye will not believe surely ye shall not be
established.
moreover the lord spake again unto Ahaz saying
ask thee a sign of the lord thy God ask it either in the
depth or in the height above.
but Ahaz said I will not ask Neither will I tempt the lord.
and he said hear ye now O house of David is it a small
thing for you to weary men but will ye weary my God also?
therefore the lord himself shall give you a sign behold a
virgin shall conceive and bear a son and shall call his name
Immanuel.
butter and honey shall he eat that he may know to refuse the
evil and choose the good.
for before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose
the good the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of
both her kings.
the lord shall bring upon thee and upon thy people and upon
thy father s house days that have not come from the day that
Ephraim departed from Judah even the king of Assyria.
and it shall come to pass in that day that the lord shall
hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers
of Egypt and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.
and they shall come and shall rest all of them in the
desolate valleys and in the holes of the rocks and upon all
thorns and upon all bushes.
in the same day shall the lord shave with a razor that is
hired namely by them beyond the river by the king of
Assyria the head and the hair of the feet and it shall also
consume the beard.
and it shall come to pass in that day that a man shall
nourish a young cow and two sheep
and it shall come to pass for the abundance of milk that they
shall give he shall eat butter for butter and honey shall
every one eat that is left in the land.
and it shall come to pass in that day that every place shall
be where there were a thousand vines at a thousand
silverlings it shall even be for briers and thorns.
with arrows and with bows shall men come thither because all
the land shall become briers and thorns.
and on all hills that shall be digged with the mattock there
shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns but it
shall be for the sending forth of oxen and for the treading
of lesser cattle.
moreover the lord said unto me take thee a great roll and
write in it with a man s pen concerning Mahershalalhashbaz.
and I took unto me faithful witnesses to record Uriah the
priest and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.
and I went unto the prophetess and she conceived and bare a
son. then said the lord to me call his name
Mahershalalhashbaz.
for before the child shall have knowledge to cry my father
and my mother the Riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria
shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.
the lord spake also unto me again saying
forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that
go softly and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah s son
now therefore behold the lord bringeth up upon them the
waters of the river strong and many even the king of
Assyria and all his glory and he shall come up over all his
channels and go over all his banks
and he shall pass through Judah he shall overflow and go
over he shall reach even to the neck and the stretching out
of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land O Immanuel.
Associate yourselves O ye people and ye shall be broken in
pieces and give ear all ye of far countries gird
yourselves and ye shall be broken in pieces gird yourselves
and ye shall be broken in pieces.
take counsel together and it shall come to nought speak the
word and it shall not stand for God is with us.
for the lord spake thus to me with a strong hand and
instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this
people saying
say ye not a confederacy to all them to whom this people
shall say a confederacy Neither fear ye their fear nor be
afraid.
sanctify the lord of hosts himself and let him be your fear
and let him be your dread.
and he shall be for a sanctuary but for a stone of stumbling
and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel for a
gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
and many among them shall stumble and fall and be broken
and be snared and be taken.
bind up the testimony seal the law among my disciples.
and I will wait upon the lord that hideth his face from the
house of Jacob and I will look for him.
behold I and the children whom the lord hath given me are for
signs and for wonders in Israel from the lord of hosts which
dwelleth in mount Zion.
and when they shall say unto you seek unto them that have
familiar spirits and unto wizards that peep and that mutter
should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the
dead?
to the law and to the testimony if they speak not according
to this word it is because there is no light in them.
and they shall pass through it hardly bestead and hungry and
it shall come to pass that when they shall be hungry they
shall fret themselves and curse their king and their God and
look upward.
and they shall look unto the earth and behold trouble and
darkness dimness of anguish and they shall be driven to
darkness.
nevertheless the dimness shall not be such as was in her
vexation when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of
Zebulun and the land of Naphtali and afterward did more
grievously afflict her by the way of the sea beyond Jordan
in Galilee of the nations.
the people that walked in darkness have seen a great light
they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death upon them
hath the light shined.
thou hast multiplied the nation and not increased the joy
they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest and as
men rejoice when they divide the spoil.
for thou hast broken the yoke of his burden and the staff of
his shoulder the rod of his oppressor as in the day of
Midian.
for every battle of the warrior is with confused noise and
garments rolled in blood but this shall be with burning and
fuel of fire.
for unto us a child is born unto us a son is given and the
government shall be upon his shoulder and his name shall be
called wonderful counsellor the Mighty God the everlasting
father the prince of peace.
of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no
end upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom to order
it and to establish it with judgment and with justice from
henceforth even for ever. the zeal of the lord of hosts will
perform this.
the lord sent a word into Jacob and it hath lighted upon
Israel.
and all the people shall know even Ephraim and the inhabitant
of Samaria that say in the pride and stoutness of heart
the bricks are fallen down but we will build with hewn
stones the sycomores are cut down but we will change them
into cedars.
therefore the lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin
against him and join his enemies together
the Syrians before and the Philistines behind and they shall
devour Israel with open mouth. for all this his anger is not
turned away but his hand is stretched out still.
for the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them Neither
do they seek the lord of hosts.
therefore the lord will cut off from Israel head and tail
branch and rush in one day.
the ancient and honourable he is the head and the prophet
that teacheth lies he is the tail.
for the leaders of this people cause them to err and they
that are led of them are destroyed.
therefore the lord shall have no joy in their young men
Neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows for
every one is an hypocrite and an evildoer and every mouth
speaketh folly. for all this his anger is not turned away but
his hand is stretched out still.
for wickedness burneth as the fire it shall devour the briers
and thorns and shall kindle in the thickets of the forest
and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke.
through the wrath of the lord of hosts is the land darkened
and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire no man shall
spare his brother.
and he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry and he
shall eat on the left hand and they shall not be satisfied
they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm
Manasseh Ephraim and Ephraim Manasseh and they together
shall be against Judah. for all this his anger is not turned
away but his hand is stretched out still.
woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees and that write
grievousness which they have prescribed
to turn aside the needy from judgment and to take away the
right from the poor of my people that widows may be their
prey and that they may rob the fatherless
and what will ye do in the day of visitation and in the
desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for
help? and where will ye leave your glory?
without me they shall bow down under the prisoners and they
shall fall under the slain. for all this his anger is not
turned away but his hand is stretched out still.
O Assyrian the rod of mine anger and the staff in their hand
is mine indignation.
I will send him against an hypocritical nation and against
the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the
spoil and to take the prey and to tread them down like the
mire of the streets.
howbeit he meaneth not so Neither doth his heart think so
but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a
few.
for he saith are not my princes altogether kings?
is not Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not
Samaria as Damascus?
as my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols and whose
graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria
shall I not as I have done unto Samaria and her idols so do
to Jerusalem and her idols?
wherefore it shall come to pass that when the lord hath
performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem I
will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of
Assyria and the glory of his high looks.
for he saith by the strength of my hand I have done it and
by my wisdom for I Am prudent and I have removed the bounds
of the people and have robbed their treasures and I have put
down the inhabitants like a valiant man
and my hand hath found as a nest the Riches of the people and
as one gathereth eggs that are left have I gathered all the
earth and there was none that moved the wing or opened the
mouth or peeped.
shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith?
or shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it?
as if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it
up or as if the staff should lift up itself as if it were no
wood.
therefore shall the lord the lord of hosts send among his
fat ones leanness and under his glory he shall kindle a
burning like the burning of a fire.
and the light of Israel shall be for a fire and his holy one
for a flame and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his
briers in one day
and shall consume the glory of his forest and of his fruitful
field both soul and body and they shall be as when a
standard-bearer fainteth.
and the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few that a
child may write them.
and it shall come to pass in that day that the remnant of
Israel and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob shall
no more again stay upon him that smote them but shall stay
upon the lord the holy one of Israel in truth.
the remnant shall return even the remnant of Jacob unto the
Mighty God.
for though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea yet a
remnant of them shall return the consumption decreed shall
overflow with righteousness.
for the lord God of hosts shall make a consumption even
determined in the midst of all the land.
therefore thus saith the lord God of hosts O my people that
dwellest in Zion be not afraid of the Assyrian he shall
smite thee with a rod and shall lift up his staff against
thee after the manner of Egypt.
for yet a very little while and the indignation shall cease
and mine anger in their destruction.
and the lord of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him
according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb and
as his rod was upon the sea so shall he lift it up after the
manner of Egypt.
and it shall come to pass in that day that his burden shall
be taken away from off thy shoulder and his yoke from off thy
neck and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the
anointing.
he is come to Aiath he is passed to Migron at Michmash he
hath laid up his carriages
they are gone over the passage they have taken up their
lodging at Geba Ramah is afraid Gibeah of Saul is fled.
lift up thy voice O daughter of Gallim cause it to be heard
unto Laish O poor Anathoth.
Madmenah is removed the inhabitants of Gebim gather
themselves to flee.
as yet shall he remain at Nob that day he shall shake his
hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion the hill of
Jerusalem.
behold the lord the lord of hosts shall lop the bough with
terror and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down and
the haughty shall be humbled.
and he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with Iron
and Lebanon shall fall by a Mighty one.
and there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse and
a branch shall grow out of his roots
and the spirit of the lord shall rest upon him the spirit of
wisdom and understanding the spirit of counsel and might the
spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the lord
and shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the
lord and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes
Neither reprove after the hearing of his ears
but with righteousness shall he judge the poor and reprove
with equity for the meek of the earth and he shall smite the
earth with the rod of his mouth and with the breath of his
lips shall he slay the wicked.
and righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins and
faithfulness the girdle of his reins.
the wolf also shall dwell with the lamb and the leopard shall
lie down with the kid and the calf and the young lion and the
fatling together and a little child shall lead them.
and the cow and the bear shall feed their young ones shall
lie down together and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
and the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp and
the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice den.
they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain for
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the lord as the
waters cover the sea.
and in that day there shall be a root of Jesse which shall
stand for an ensign of the people to it shall the Gentiles
seek and his rest shall be glorious.
and it shall come to pass in that day that the lord shall set
his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his
people which shall be left from Assyria and from Egypt and
from Pathros and from Cush and from Elam and from Shinar
and from Hamath and from the islands of the sea.
and he shall set up an ensign for the nations and shall
assemble the outcasts of Israel and gather together the
dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.
the envy also of Ephraim shall depart and the adversaries of
Judah shall be cut off Ephraim shall not envy Judah and
Judah shall not vex Ephraim.
but they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines
toward the west they shall spoil them of the east together
they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab and the children
of Ammon shall obey them.
and the lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian
sea and with his Mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the
river and shall smite it in the seven streams and make men
go over dryshod.
and there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people
which shall be left from Assyria like as it was to Israel in
the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.
and in that day thou shalt say O lord I will praise thee
though thou wast angry with me thine anger is turned away
and thou comfortedst me.
behold God is my salvation I will trust and not be afraid
for the lord Jehovah is my strength and my song he also is
become my salvation.
therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation.
and in that day shall ye say praise the lord call upon his
name declare his doings among the people make mention that
his name is exalted.
sing unto the lord for he hath done excellent things this is
known in all the earth.
cry out and shout thou inhabitant of Zion for great is the
holy one of Israel in the midst of thee.
the burden of Babylon which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.
lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain exalt the voice
unto them shake the hand that they may go into the gates of
the nobles.
I have commanded my sanctified ones I have also called my
Mighty ones for mine anger even them that rejoice in my
highness.
the noise of a multitude in the mountains like as of a great
people a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered
together the lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.
they come from a far country from the end of heaven even the
lord and the weapons of his indignation to destroy the whole
land.
howl ye for the day of the lord is at hand it shall come as
a destruction from the almighty.
therefore shall all hands be faint and every man s heart
shall melt
and they shall be afraid pangs and sorrows shall take hold of
them they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth they
shall be amazed one at another their faces shall be as
flames.
behold the day of the lord cometh cruel both with wrath and
fierce anger to lay the land desolate and he shall destroy
the sinners thereof out of it.
for the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall
not give their light the sun shall be darkened in his going
forth and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.
and I will punish the world for their evil and the wicked for
their iniquity and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to
cease and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.
I will make a man more precious than fine gold even a man
than the golden wedge of Ophir.
therefore I will shake the heavens and the earth shall remove
out of her place in the wrath of the lord of hosts and in
the day of his fierce anger.
and it shall be as the chased roe and as a sheep that no man
taketh up they shall every man turn to his own people and
flee every one into his own land.
every one that is found shall be thrust through and every one
that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword.
their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their
eyes their houses shall be spoiled and their wives ravished.
behold I will stir up the Medes against them which shall not
regard Silver and as for gold they shall not delight in it.
their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces and they
shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb their eyes shall
not spare children.
and Babylon the glory of kingdoms the beauty of the
Chaldees excellency shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah.
it shall never be inhabited Neither shall it be dwelt in from
generation to generation Neither shall the Arabian pitch tent
there Neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.
but wild beasts of the desert shall lie there and their
houses shall be full of doleful creatures and owls shall
dwell there and satyrs shall dance there.
and the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate
houses and dragons in their pleasant palaces and her time is
near to come and her days shall not be prolonged.
for the lord will have mercy on Jacob and will yet choose
Israel and set them in their own land and the strangers
shall be joined with them and they shall cleave to the house
of Jacob.
and the people shall take them and bring them to their place
and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the
lord for servants and handmaids and they shall take them
captives whose captives they were and they shall rule over
their oppressors.
and it shall come to pass in the day that the lord shall give
thee rest from thy sorrow and from thy fear and from the
hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve
that thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of
Babylon and say how hath the oppressor ceased the golden
city ceased
the lord hath broken the staff of the wicked and the sceptre
of the rulers.
he who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke he
that ruled the nations in anger is persecuted and none
hindereth.
the whole earth is at rest and is quiet they break forth
into singing.
yea the fir trees rejoice at thee and the cedars of Lebanon
saying since thou art laid down no feller is come up against
us.
hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy
coming it stirreth up the dead for thee even all the chief
ones of the earth it hath raised up from their thrones all
the kings of the nations.
all they shall speak and say unto thee art thou also become
weak as we? art thou become like unto us?
thy pomp is brought down to the grave and the noise of thy
viols the worm is spread under thee and the worms cover
thee.
how art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer son of the
morning how art thou cut down to the ground which didst
weaken the nations
for thou hast said in thine heart I will ascend into heaven
I will exalt my throne above the stars of God I will sit also
upon the mount of the congregation in the sides of the north
I will ascend above the heights of the clouds I will be like
the most high.
yet thou shalt be brought down to hell to the sides of the
pit.
they that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee and consider
thee saying is this the man that made the earth to tremble
that did shake kingdoms
that made the world as a wilderness and destroyed the cities
thereof that opened not the house of his prisoners?
all the kings of the nations even all of them lie in glory
every one in his own house.
but thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch
and as the raiment of those that are slain thrust through
with a sword that go down to the stones of the pit as a
carcase trodden under feet.
thou shalt not be joined with them in burial because thou
hast destroyed thy land and slain thy people the seed of
evildoers shall never be renowned.
prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their
fathers that they do not rise nor possess the land nor fill
the face of the world with cities.
for I will rise up against them saith the lord of hosts and
cut off from Babylon the name and remnant and son and
nephew saith the lord.
I will also make it a possession for the bittern and pools of
water and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction
saith the lord of hosts.
the lord of hosts hath sworn saying surely as I have
thought so shall it come to pass and as I have purposed so
shall it stand
that I will break the Assyrian in my land and upon my
mountains tread him under foot then shall his yoke depart
from off them and his burden depart from off their shoulders.
this is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth and
this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations.
for the lord of hosts hath purposed and who shall disannul
it? and his hand is stretched out and who shall turn it back?
in the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.
rejoice not thou whole Palestina because the rod of him that
smote thee is broken for out of the serpent s root shall come
forth a cockatrice and his fruit shall be a fiery flying
serpent.
and the firstborn of the poor shall feed and the needy shall
lie down in safety and I will kill thy root with famine and
he shall slay thy remnant.
howl O gate cry O city thou whole Palestina art
dissolved for there shall come from the north a smoke and
none shall be alone in his appointed times.
what shall one then answer the messengers of the nation? that
the lord hath founded Zion and the poor of his people shall
trust in it.
the burden of Moab. because in the night Ar of Moab is laid
waste and brought to silence because in the night Kir of
Moab is laid waste and brought to silence
he is gone up to Bajith and to Dibon the high places to
weep Moab shall howl over Nebo and over Medeba on all their
heads shall be baldness and every beard cut off.
in their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth on
the tops of their houses and in their streets every one
shall howl weeping abundantly.
and Heshbon shall cry and Elealeh their voice shall be heard
even unto Jahaz therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall
cry out his life shall be grievous unto him.
my heart shall cry out for Moab his fugitives shall flee unto
Zoar an heifer of three years old for by the mounting up of
Luhith with weeping shall they go it up for in the way of
Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction.
for the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate for the hay is
withered away the grass faileth there is no green thing.
therefore the abundance they have gotten and that which they
have laid up shall they carry away to the brook of the
willows.
for the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab the
howling thereof unto Eglaim and the howling thereof unto
Beerelim.
for the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood for I will
bring more upon Dimon lions upon him that escapeth of Moab
and upon the remnant of the land.
send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from Sela to the
wilderness unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.
for it shall be that as a wandering bird cast out of the
nest so the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon.
take counsel execute judgment make thy shadow as the night
in the midst of the noonday hide the outcasts bewray not him
that wandereth.
let mine outcasts dwell with thee Moab be thou a covert to
them from the face of the spoiler for the extortioner is at
an end the spoiler ceaseth the oppressors are consumed out
of the land.
and in mercy shall the throne be established and he shall sit
upon it in truth in the tabernacle of David judging and
seeking judgment and hasting righteousness.
we have heard of the pride of Moab he is very proud even of
his haughtiness and his pride and his wrath but his lies
shall not be so.
therefore shall Moab howl for Moab every one shall howl for
the foundations of Kirhareseth shall ye mourn surely they are
stricken.
for the fields of Heshbon languish and the vine of Sibmah
the lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants
thereof they are come even unto Jazer they wandered through
the wilderness her branches are stretched out they are gone
over the sea.
therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the vine of
Sibmah I will water thee with my tears O Heshbon and
Elealeh for the shouting for thy summer fruits and for thy
harvest is fallen.
and gladness is taken away and joy out of the plentiful
field and in the vineyards there shall be no singing Neither
shall there be shouting the treaders shall tread out no wine
in their presses I have made their vintage shouting to cease.
wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab and
mine inward parts for Kirharesh.
and it shall come to pass when it is seen that Moab is weary
on the high place that he shall come to his sanctuary to
pray but he shall not prevail.
this is the word that the lord hath spoken concerning Moab
since that time.
but now the lord hath spoken saying within three years as
the years of an hireling and the glory of Moab shall be
contemned with all that great multitude and the remnant
shall be very small and feeble.
the burden of Damascus. behold Damascus is taken away from
being a city and it shall be a ruinous heap.
the cities of Aroer are forsaken they shall be for flocks
which shall lie down and none shall make them afraid.
the fortress also shall cease from Ephraim and the kingdom
from Damascus and the remnant of Syria they shall be as the
glory of the children of Israel saith the lord of hosts.
and in that day it shall come to pass that the glory of Jacob
shall be made thin and the fatness of his flesh shall wax
lean.
and it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn and
reapeth the ears with his arm and it shall be as he that
gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim.
yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it as the shaking of an
olive tree two or three berries in the top of the uppermost
bough four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof
saith the lord God of Israel.
at that day shall a man look to his maker and his eyes shall
have respect to the holy one of Israel.
and he shall not look to the altars the work of his hands
Neither shall respect that which his fingers have made either
the groves or the images.
in that day shall his strong cities be as a forsaken bough
and an uppermost branch which they left because of the
children of Israel and there shall be desolation.
because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation and hast
not been mindful of the rock of thy strength therefore shalt
thou plant pleasant plants and shalt set it with strange
slips
in the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow and in the
morning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish but the harvest
shall be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.
woe to the multitude of many people which make a noise like
the noise of the seas and to the rushing of nations that
make a rushing like the rushing of Mighty waters
the nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters but
God shall rebuke them and they shall flee far off and shall
be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind and
like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.
and behold at eveningtide trouble and before the morning he
is not. this is the portion of them that spoil us and the Lot
of them that rob us.
woe to the land shadowing with wings which is beyond the
rivers of Ethiopia
that sendeth ambassadors by the sea even in vessels of
bulrushes upon the waters saying go ye swift messengers to
a nation scattered and peeled to a people terrible from their
beginning hitherto a nation meted out and trodden down whose
land the rivers have spoiled
all ye inhabitants of the world and dwellers on the earth
see ye when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains and
when he bloweth a trumpet hear ye.
for so the lord said unto me I will take my rest and I will
consider in my dwelling place like a clear heat upon herbs
and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
for afore the harvest when the bud is perfect and the sour
grape is ripening in the flower he shall both cut off the
sprigs with pruning hooks and take away and cut down the
branches.
they shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains
and to the beasts of the earth and the fowls shall summer
upon them and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon
them.
in that time shall the present be brought unto the lord of
hosts of a people scattered and peeled and from a people
terrible from their beginning hitherto a nation meted out and
trodden under foot whose land the rivers have spoiled to the
place of the name of the lord of hosts the mount Zion.
the burden of Egypt. behold the lord rideth upon a swift
cloud and shall come into Egypt and the idols of Egypt shall
be moved at his presence and the heart of Egypt shall melt in
the midst of it.
and I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians and they
shall fight every one against his brother and every one
against his neighbour city against city and kingdom against
kingdom.
and the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof and I
will destroy the counsel thereof and they shall seek to the
idols and to the charmers and to them that have familiar
spirits and to the wizards.
and the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel
lord and a fierce king shall rule over them saith the lord
the lord of hosts.
and the waters shall fail from the sea and the river shall be
wasted and dried up.
and they shall turn the rivers far away and the brooks of
defence shall be emptied and dried up the reeds and flags
shall wither.
the paper reeds by the brooks by the mouth of the brooks and
every thing sown by the brooks shall wither be driven away
and be no more.
the fishers also shall mourn and all they that cast angle
into the brooks shall lament and they that spread nets upon
the waters shall languish.
moreover they that work in fine flax and they that weave
networks shall be confounded.
and they shall be broken in the purposes thereof all that
make sluices and ponds for fish.
surely the princes of Zoan are fools the counsel of the wise
counsellors of Pharaoh is become brutish how say ye unto
Pharaoh I Am the son of the wise the son of ancient kings?
where are they? where are thy wise men? and let them tell thee
now and let them know what the lord of hosts hath purposed
upon Egypt.
the princes of Zoan are become fools the princes of Noph are
deceived they have also seduced Egypt even they that are the
stay of the tribes thereof.
the lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof
and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof as a
drunken man staggereth in his vomit.
Neither shall there be any work for Egypt which the head or
tail branch or rush may do.
in that day shall Egypt be like unto women and it shall be
afraid and fear because of the shaking of the hand of the lord
of hosts which he shaketh over it.
and the land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt every one
that maketh mention thereof shall be afraid in himself
because of the counsel of the lord of hosts which he hath
determined against it.
in that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the
language of Canaan and swear to the lord of hosts one shall
be called the city of destruction.
in that day shall there be an altar to the lord in the midst
of the land of Egypt and a pillar at the border thereof to
the lord.
and it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the lord of
hosts in the land of Egypt for they shall cry unto the lord
because of the oppressors and he shall send them a saviour
and a great one and he shall deliver them.
and the lord shall be known to Egypt and the Egyptians shall
know the lord in that day and shall do sacrifice and
oblation yea they shall vow a vow unto the lord and perform
it.
and the lord shall smite Egypt he shall smite and heal it
and they shall return even to the lord and he shall be
intreated of them and shall heal them.
in that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria
and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt and the Egyptian into
Assyria and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.
in that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with
Assyria even a blessing in the midst of the land
whom the lord of hosts shall bless saying blessed be Egypt
my people and Assyria the work of my hands and Israel mine
inheritance.
in the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod when Sargon the
king of Assyria sent him and fought against Ashdod and took
it
at the same time spake the lord by Isaiah the son of Amoz
saying go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins and put
off thy shoe from thy foot. and he did so walking naked and
barefoot.
and the lord said like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked
and barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and
upon Ethiopia
so shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians
prisoners and the Ethiopians captives young and old naked
and barefoot even with their buttocks uncovered to the shame
of Egypt.
and they shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their
expectation and of Egypt their glory.
and the inhabitant of this isle shall say in that day behold
such is our expectation whither we flee for help to be
delivered from the king of Assyria and how shall we escape?
the burden of the desert of the sea. as whirlwinds in the
south pass through so it cometh from the desert from a
terrible land.
a grievous vision is declared unto me the treacherous dealer
dealeth treacherously and the spoiler spoileth. go up O
Elam besiege O Media all the sighing thereof have I made to
cease.
therefore are my loins filled with pain pangs have taken hold
upon me as the pangs of a woman that travaileth I was bowed
down at the hearing of it I was dismayed at the seeing of it.
my heart panted fearfulness affrighted me the night of my
pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me.
prepare the table watch in the watchtower eat drink Arise
ye princes and anoint the shield.
for thus hath the lord said unto me go set a watchman let
him declare what he seeth.
and he saw a chariot with a couple of horsemen a chariot of
asses and a chariot of camels and he hearkened diligently
with Much heed
and he cried a lion my lord I stand continually upon the
watchtower in the daytime and I Am set in my ward whole
nights
and behold here cometh a chariot of men with a couple of
horsemen. and he answered and said Babylon is fallen is
fallen and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken
unto the ground.
O my threshing and the corn of my floor that which I have
heard of the lord of hosts the God of Israel have I declared
unto you.
the burden of Dumah. he calleth to me out of Seir watchman
what of the night? watchman what of the night?
the watchman said the morning cometh and also the night if
ye will enquire enquire ye return come.
the burden upon Arabia. in the forest in Arabia shall ye
lodge O ye travelling companies of Dedanim.
the inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that
was thirsty they prevented with their bread him that fled.
for they fled from the swords from the drawn sword and from
the bent bow and from the grievousness of war.
for thus hath the lord said unto me within a year according
to the years of an hireling and all the glory of Kedar shall
fail
and the residue of the number of archers the Mighty men of
the children of Kedar shall be diminished for the lord God
of Israel hath spoken it.
the burden of the valley of vision. what aileth thee now that
thou art wholly gone up to the housetops?
thou that art full of stirs a tumultuous city joyous city
thy slain men are not slain with the sword nor dead in
battle.
all thy rulers are fled together they are bound by the
archers all that are found in thee are bound together which
have fled from far.
therefore said I look away from me I will weep bitterly
labour not to comfort me because of the spoiling of the
daughter of my people.
for it is a day of trouble and of treading down and of
perplexity by the lord God of hosts in the valley of vision
breaking down the walls and of crying to the mountains.
and Elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen
and Kir uncovered the shield.
and it shall come to pass that thy choicest valleys shall be
full of chariots and the horsemen shall set themselves in
array at the gate.
and he discovered the covering of Judah and thou didst look
in that day to the armour of the house of the forest.
ye have seen also the breaches of the city of David that they
are many and ye gathered together the waters of the lower
pool.
and ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem and the houses
have ye broken down to fortify the wall.
ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of
the old pool but ye have not looked unto the maker thereof
Neither had respect unto him that fashioned it long ago.
and in that day did the lord God of hosts call to weeping and
to mourning and to baldness and to girding with sackcloth
and behold joy and gladness slaying oxen and killing sheep
eating flesh and drinking wine let us eat and drink for to
morrow we shall die.
and it was revealed in mine ears by the lord of hosts surely
this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die saith
the lord God of hosts.
thus saith the lord God of hosts go get thee unto this
treasurer even unto Shebna which is over the house and say
what hast thou here? and whom hast thou here that thou hast
hewed thee out a sepulchre here as he that heweth him out a
sepulchre on high and that graveth an habitation for himself
in a rock?
behold the lord will carry thee away with a Mighty captivity
and will surely cover thee.
he will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a
large country there shalt thou die and there the chariots of
thy glory shall be the shame of thy lord s house.
and I will drive thee from thy station and from thy state
shall he pull thee down.
and it shall come to pass in that day that I will call my
servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah
and I will clothe him with thy robe and strengthen him with
thy girdle and I will commit thy government into his hand
and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and
to the house of Judah.
and the key of the house of David will I lay upon his
shoulder so he shall open and none shall shut and he shall
shut and none shall open.
and I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place and he shall
be for a glorious throne to his father s house.
and they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father s
house the offspring and the issue all vessels of small
quantity from the vessels of cups even to all the vessels of
flagons.
in that day saith the lord of hosts shall the nail that is
fastened in the sure place be removed and be cut down and
fall and the burden that was upon it shall be cut off for
the lord hath spoken it.
the burden of Tyre. howl ye ships of Tarshish for it is laid
waste so that there is no house no entering in from the
land of Chittim it is revealed to them.
be still ye inhabitants of the isle thou whom the merchants
of Zidon that pass over the sea have replenished.
and by great waters the seed of Sihor the harvest of the
river is her revenue and she is a mart of nations.
be thou ashamed O Zidon for the sea hath spoken even the
strength of the sea saying I travail not nor bring forth
children Neither do I nourish up young men nor bring up
virgins.
as at the report concerning Egypt so shall they be sorely
pained at the report of Tyre.
pass ye over to Tarshish howl ye inhabitants of the isle.
is this your joyous city whose antiquity is of ancient days?
her own feet shall carry her afar off to Sojourn.
who hath taken this counsel against Tyre the crowning city
whose merchants are princes whose traffickers are the
honourable of the earth?
the lord of hosts hath purposed it to stain the pride of all
glory and to bring into contempt all the honourable of the
earth.
pass through thy land as a river O daughter of Tarshish
there is no more strength.
he stretched out his hand over the sea he shook the kingdoms
the lord hath given a commandment against the merchant city
to destroy the strong holds thereof.
and he said thou shalt no more rejoice O thou oppressed
virgin daughter of Zidon Arise pass over to Chittim there
also shalt thou have no rest.
behold the land of the Chaldeans this people was not till
the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness
they set up the towers thereof they raised up the palaces
thereof and he brought it to ruin.
howl ye ships of Tarshish for your strength is laid waste.
and it shall come to pass in that day that Tyre shall be
forgotten seventy years according to the days of one king
after the end of seventy years shall Tyre sing as an harlot.
take an harp go about the city thou harlot that hast been
forgotten make sweet melody sing many songs that thou
mayest be remembered.
and it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years that
the lord will visit Tyre and she shall turn to her hire and
shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the world
upon the face of the earth.
and her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the
lord it shall not be treasured nor laid up for her
merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the lord to
eat sufficiently and for durable clothing.
behold the lord maketh the earth empty and maketh it waste
and turneth it upside down and scattereth abroad the
inhabitants thereof.
and it shall be as with the people so with the priest as
with the servant so with his Master as with the maid so
with her mistress as with the buyer so with the seller as
with the lender so with the borrower as with the taker of
usury so with the giver of usury to him.
the land shall be utterly emptied and utterly spoiled for
the lord hath spoken this word.
the earth mourneth and fadeth away the world languisheth and
fadeth away the haughty people of the earth do languish.
the earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof
because they have transgressed the laws changed the
ordinance broken the everlasting covenant.
therefore hath the curse devoured the earth and they that
dwell therein are desolate therefore the inhabitants of the
earth are burned and few men left.
the new wine mourneth the vine languisheth all the
merryhearted do Sigh.
the mirth of tabrets ceaseth the noise of them that rejoice
endeth the joy of the harp ceaseth.
they shall not drink wine with a song strong drink shall be
bitter to them that drink it.
the city of confusion is broken down every house is shut up
that no man may come in.
there is a crying for wine in the streets all joy is
darkened the mirth of the land is gone.
in the city is left desolation and the gate is smitten with
destruction.
when thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the
people there shall be as the shaking of an olive tree and as
the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done.
they shall lift up their voice they shall sing for the
majesty of the lord they shall cry aloud from the sea.
wherefore glorify ye the lord in the fires even the name of
the lord God of Israel in the isles of the sea.
from the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs even
glory to the righteous. but I said my leanness my leanness
woe unto me the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously
yea the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.
fear and the pit and the snare are upon thee O inhabitant
of the earth.
and it shall come to pass that he who fleeth from the noise
of the fear shall fall into the pit and he that cometh up out
of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare for the
windows from on high are open and the foundations of the
earth do shake.
the earth is utterly broken down the earth is clean
dissolved the earth is moved exceedingly.
the earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard and shall be
removed like a cottage and the transgression thereof shall be
heavy upon it and it shall fall and not rise again.
and it shall come to pass in that day that the lord shall
punish the host of the high ones that are on high and the
kings of the earth upon the earth.
and they shall be gathered together as prisoners are gathered
in the pit and shall be shut up in the prison and after many
days shall they be visited.
then the moon shall be confounded and the sun ashamed when
the lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion and in Jerusalem
and before his ancients gloriously.
O lord thou art my God I will exalt thee I will praise thy
name for thou hast done wonderful things thy counsels of old
are faithfulness and truth.
for thou hast made of a city an heap of a defenced city a
ruin a palace of strangers to be no city it shall never be
built.
therefore shall the strong people glorify thee the city of
the terrible nations shall fear thee.
for thou hast been a strength to the poor a strength to the
needy in his distress a refuge from the storm a shadow from
the heat when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm
against the wall.
thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers as the heat in a
dry place even the heat with the shadow of a cloud the
branch of the terrible ones shall be brought low.
and in this mountain shall the lord of hosts make unto all
people a feast of fat things a feast of wines on the lees of
fat things full of marrow of wines on the lees well refined.
and he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering
cast over all people and the vail that is spread over all
nations.
he will swallow up death in victory and the lord God will
wipe away tears from off all faces and the rebuke of his
people shall he take away from off all the earth for the lord
hath spoken it.
and it shall be said in that day lo this is our God we have
waited for him and he will save us this is the lord we have
waited for him we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.
for in this mountain shall the hand of the lord rest and Moab
shall be trodden down under him even as straw is trodden down
for the dunghill.
and he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them as
he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim and he
shall bring down their pride together with the spoils of their
hands.
and the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring
down lay low and bring to the ground even to the dust.
in that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah we
have a strong city salvation will God appoint for walls and
bulwarks.
open ye the gates that the righteous nation which keepeth the
truth may enter in.
thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on
thee because he trusteth in thee.
trust ye in the lord for ever for in the lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength
for he bringeth down them that dwell on high the lofty city
he layeth it low he layeth it low even to the ground he
bringeth it even to the dust.
the foot shall tread it down even the feet of the poor and
the steps of the needy.
the way of the just is uprightness thou most upright dost
weigh the path of the just.
yea in the way of thy judgments O lord have we waited for
thee the desire of our soul is to thy name and to the
remembrance of thee.
with my soul have I desired thee in the night yea with my
spirit within me will I seek thee early for when thy
judgments are in the earth the inhabitants of the world will
learn righteousness.
let favour be shewed to the wicked yet will he not learn
righteousness in the land of uprightness will he deal
unjustly and will not behold the majesty of the lord.
lord when thy hand is lifted up they will not see but they
shall see and be ashamed for their envy at the people yea
the fire of thine enemies shall devour them.
lord thou wilt ordain peace for us for thou also hast
wrought all our works in us.
O lord our God other lords beside thee have had dominion over
us but by thee only will we make mention of thy name.
they are dead they shall not live they are deceased they
shall not rise therefore hast thou visited and destroyed
them and made all their memory to perish.
thou hast increased the nation O lord thou hast increased
the nation thou art glorified thou hadst removed it far unto
all the ends of the earth.
lord in trouble have they visited thee they poured out a
prayer when thy chastening was upon them.
like as a woman with child that draweth near the time of her
delivery is in pain and crieth out in her pangs so have we
been in thy sight O lord.
we have been with child we have been in pain we have as it
were brought forth wind we have not wrought any deliverance
in the earth Neither have the inhabitants of the world
fallen.
thy dead men shall live together with my dead body shall they
Arise. awake and sing ye that dwell in dust for thy dew is
as the dew of herbs and the earth shall cast out the dead.
come my people enter thou into thy chambers and shut thy
doors about thee hide thyself as it were for a little moment
until the indignation be overpast.
for behold the lord cometh out of his place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity the earth also
shall disclose her blood and shall no more cover her slain.
in that day the lord with his sore and great and strong sword
shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent even leviathan
that crooked serpent and he shall slay the dragon that is in
the sea.
in that day sing ye unto her a vineyard of red wine.
I the lord do keep it I will water it every moment lest any
hurt it I will keep it night and day.
fury is not in me who would set the briers and thorns against
me in battle? I would go through them I would burn them
together.
or let him take hold of my strength that he may make peace
with me and he shall make peace with me.
he shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root Israel
shall blossom and bud and fill the face of the world with
fruit.
hath he smitten him as he smote those that smote him? or is
he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by
him?
in measure when it shooteth forth thou wilt debate with it
he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind.
by this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged and
this is all the fruit to take away his Sin when he maketh all
the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten in
sunder the groves and images shall not stand up.
yet the defenced city shall be desolate and the habitation
forsaken and left like a wilderness there shall the calf
feed and there shall he lie down and consume the branches
thereof.
when the boughs thereof are withered they shall be broken
off the women come and set them on fire for it is a people
of no understanding therefore he that made them will not have
mercy on them and he that formed them will shew them no
favour.
and it shall come to pass in that day that the lord shall
beat off from the channel of the river unto the stream of
Egypt and ye shall be gathered one by one O ye children of
Israel.
and it shall come to pass in that day that the great trumpet
shall be blown and they shall come which were ready to perish
in the land of Assyria and the outcasts in the land of Egypt
and shall worship the lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem.
woe to the crown of pride to the drunkards of Ephraim whose
glorious beauty is a fading flower which are on the head of
the fat valleys of them that are overcome with wine
behold the lord hath a Mighty and strong one which as a
tempest of hail and a destroying storm as a flood of Mighty
waters overflowing shall cast down to the earth with the
hand.
the crown of pride the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden
under feet
and the glorious beauty which is on the head of the fat
valley shall be a fading flower and as the hasty fruit
before the summer which when he that looketh upon it seeth
while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up.
in that day shall the lord of hosts be for a crown of glory
and for a diadem of beauty unto the residue of his people
and for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment
and for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate.
but they also have erred through wine and through strong
drink are out of the way the priest and the prophet have
erred through strong drink they are swallowed up of wine
they are out of the way through strong drink they err in
vision they stumble in judgment.
for all tables are full of vomit and filthiness so that there
is no place clean.
whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to
understand doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk and
drawn from the breasts.
for precept must be upon precept precept upon precept line
upon line line upon line here a little and there a little
for with stammering lips and another tongue will he speak to
this people.
to whom he said this is the rest wherewith ye may cause the
weary to rest and this is the refreshing yet they would not
hear.
but the word of the lord was unto them precept upon precept
precept upon precept line upon line line upon line here a
little and there a little that they might go and fall
backward and be broken and snared and taken.
wherefore hear the word of the lord ye scornful men that
rule this people which is in Jerusalem.
because ye have said we have made a covenant with death and
with hell are we at agreement when the overflowing scourge
shall pass through it shall not come unto us for we have
made lies our refuge and under falsehood have we hid
ourselves
therefore thus saith the lord God behold I lay in Zion for a
foundation a stone a tried stone a precious corner stone a
sure foundation he that believeth shall not make haste.
judgment also will I lay to the line and righteousness to the
plummet and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies and
the waters shall overflow the hiding place.
and your covenant with death shall be disannulled and your
agreement with hell shall not stand when the overflowing
scourge shall pass through then ye shall be trodden down by
it.
from the time that it goeth forth it shall take you for
morning by morning shall it pass over by day and by night
and it shall be a vexation only to understand the report.
for the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on
it and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in
it.
for the lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim he shall be
wroth as in the valley of Gibeon that he may do his work his
strange work and bring to pass his act his strange act.
now therefore be ye not mockers lest your Bands be made
strong for I have heard from the lord God of hosts a
consumption even determined upon the whole earth.
give ye ear and hear my voice hearken and hear my speech.
doth the plowman plow all day to sow? doth he open and break
the clods of his ground?
when he hath made plain the face thereof doth he not cast
abroad the fitches and scatter the cummin and cast in the
principal wheat and the appointed barley and the rie in their
place?
for his God doth instruct him to discretion and doth teach
him.
for the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument
Neither is a cart wheel turned about upon the cummin but the
fitches are beaten out with a staff and the cummin with a
rod.
bread corn is bruised because he will not ever be threshing
it nor break it with the wheel of his cart nor bruise it
with his horsemen.
this also cometh forth from the lord of hosts which is
wonderful in counsel and excellent in working.
woe to Ariel to Ariel the city where David dwelt add ye
year to year let them kill sacrifices.
yet I will distress Ariel and there shall be heaviness and
sorrow and it shall be unto me as Ariel.
and I will camp against thee round about and will lay siege
against thee with a mount and I will raise forts against
thee.
and thou shalt be brought down and shalt speak out of the
ground and thy speech shall be low out of the dust and thy
voice shall be as of one that hath a familiar spirit out of
the ground and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.
moreover the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small
dust and the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff
that passeth away yea it shall be at an instant suddenly.
thou shalt be visited of the lord of hosts with thunder and
with earthquake and great noise with storm and tempest and
the flame of devouring fire.
and the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel
even all that fight against her and her munition and that
distress her shall be as a dream of a night vision.
it shall even be as when an hungry man dreameth and behold
he eateth but he awaketh and his soul is empty or as when a
thirsty man dreameth and behold he drinketh but he
awaketh and behold he is faint and his soul hath appetite
so shall the multitude of all the nations be that fight
against mount Zion.
stay yourselves and wonder cry ye out and cry they are
drunken but not with wine they stagger but not with strong
drink.
for the lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep
sleep and hath closed your eyes the prophets and your
rulers the seers hath he covered.
and the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a
book that is sealed which men deliver to one that is learned
saying read this I pray thee and he saith I cannot for it
is sealed
and the book is delivered to him that is not learned saying
read this I pray thee and he saith I Am not learned.
wherefore the lord said forasmuch as this people draw near me
with their mouth and with their lips do honour me but have
removed their heart far from me and their fear toward me is
taught by the precept of men
therefore behold I will proceed to do a marvellous work
among this people even a marvellous work and a wonder for
the wisdom of their wise men shall perish and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.
woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the
lord and their works are in the dark and they say who seeth
us? and who knoweth us?
surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as
the potter s clay for shall the work say of him that made it
he made me not? or shall the thing framed say of him that
framed it he had no understanding?
is it not yet a very little while and Lebanon shall be turned
into a fruitful field and the fruitful field shall be
esteemed as a forest?
and in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book and
the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of
darkness.
the meek also shall increase their joy in the lord and the
poor among men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel.
for the terrible one is brought to nought and the scorner is
consumed and all that watch for iniquity are cut off
that make a man an offender for a word and lay a snare for
him that reproveth in the gate and turn aside the just for a
thing of nought.
therefore thus saith the lord who redeemed Abraham
concerning the house of Jacob Jacob shall not now be ashamed
Neither shall his face now wax pale.
but when he seeth his children the work of mine hands in the
midst of him they shall sanctify my name and sanctify the
holy one of Jacob and shall fear the God of Israel.
they also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding
and they that murmured shall learn doctrine.
woe to the rebellious children saith the lord that take
counsel but not of me and that cover with a covering but
not of my spirit that they may add Sin to Sin
that walk to go down into Egypt and have not asked at my
mouth to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh
and to trust in the shadow of Egypt
therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame and the
trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion.
for his princes were at Zoan and his ambassadors came to
Hanes.
they were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them
nor be an help nor profit but a shame and also a reproach.
the burden of the beasts of the south into the land of
trouble and anguish from whence come the young and old lion
the viper and fiery flying serpent they will carry their
Riches upon the shoulders of young asses and their treasures
upon the bunches of camels to a people that shall not profit
them.
for the Egyptians shall help in vain and to no purpose
therefore have I cried concerning this their strength is to
sit still.
now go write it before them in a table and note it in a
book that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever
that this is a rebellious people lying children children
that will not hear the law of the lord
which say to the seers see not and to the prophets prophesy
not unto us right things speak unto us smooth things
prophesy deceits
get you out of the way turn aside out of the path cause the
holy one of Israel to cease from before us.
wherefore thus saith the holy one of Israel because ye
despise this word and trust in oppression and perverseness
and stay thereon
therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to
fall swelling out in a high wall whose breaking cometh
suddenly at an instant.
and he shall break it as the breaking of the potters vessel
that is broken in pieces he shall not spare so that there
shall not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire
from the hearth or to take water withal out of the pit.
for thus saith the lord God the holy one of Israel in
returning and rest shall ye be saved in quietness and in
confidence shall be your strength and ye would not.
but ye said no for we will flee upon horses therefore shall
ye flee and we will ride upon the swift therefore shall
they that pursue you be swift.
one thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one at the rebuke of
five shall ye flee till ye be left as a beacon upon the top
of a mountain and as an ensign on an hill.
and therefore will the lord wait that he may be gracious unto
you and therefore will he be exalted that he may have mercy
upon you for the lord is a God of judgment blessed are all
they that wait for him.
for the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem thou shalt
weep no more he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice
of thy cry when he shall hear it he will answer thee.
and though the lord give you the bread of adversity and the
water of affliction yet shall not thy teachers be removed
into a corner any more but thine eyes shall see thy teachers
and thine ears shall hear a word behind thee saying this is
the way walk ye in it when ye turn to the right hand and
when ye turn to the left.
ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of
Silver and the ornament of thy molten images of gold thou
shalt cast them away as a menstruous cloth thou shalt say
unto it get thee hence.
then shall he give the rain of thy seed that thou shalt sow
the ground withal and bread of the increase of the earth and
it shall be fat and plenteous in that day shall thy cattle
feed in large pastures.
the oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground
shall eat clean provender which hath been winnowed with the
shovel and with the fan.
and there shall be upon every high mountain and upon every
high hill rivers and streams of waters in the day of the
great slaughter when the towers fall.
moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the
sun and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold as the light
of seven days in the day that the lord bindeth up the breach
of his people and healeth the stroke of their wound.
behold the name of the lord cometh from far burning with his
anger and the burden thereof is heavy his lips are full of
indignation and his tongue as a devouring fire
and his breath as an overflowing stream shall reach to the
midst of the neck to sift the nations with the sieve of
vanity and there shall be a bridle in the jaws of the people
causing them to err.
ye shall have a song as in the night when a holy solemnity is
kept and gladness of heart as when one goeth with a pipe to
come into the mountain of the lord to the Mighty one of
Israel.
and the lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard and
shall shew the lighting down of his arm with the indignation
of his anger and with the flame of a devouring fire with
scattering and tempest and hailstones.
for through the voice of the lord shall the Assyrian be beaten
down which smote with a rod.
and in every place where the grounded staff shall pass which
the lord shall lay upon him it shall be with tabrets and
harps and in battles of shaking will he fight with it.
for Tophet is ordained of old yea for the king it is
prepared he hath made it deep and large the pile thereof is
fire and Much wood the breath of the lord like a stream of
brimstone doth kindle it.
woe to them that go down to Egypt for help and stay on
horses and trust in chariots because they are many and in
horsemen because they are very strong but they look not unto
the holy one of Israel Neither seek the lord
yet he also is wise and will bring evil and will not call
back his words but will Arise against the house of the
evildoers and against the help of them that work iniquity.
now the Egyptians are men and not God and their horses
flesh and not spirit. when the lord shall stretch out his
hand both he that helpeth shall fall and he that is holpen
shall fall down and they all shall fail together.
for thus hath the lord spoken unto me like as the lion and
the young lion roaring on his prey when a multitude of
shepherds is called forth against him he will not be afraid
of their voice nor abase himself for the noise of them so
shall the lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion and
for the hill thereof.
as birds flying so will the lord of hosts defend Jerusalem
defending also he will deliver it and passing over he will
preserve it.
turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply
revolted.
for in that day every man shall cast away his idols of Silver
and his idols of gold which your own hands have made unto you
for a Sin.
then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword not of a Mighty
man and the sword not of a mean man shall devour him but
he shall flee from the sword and his young men shall be
discomfited.
and he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear and his
princes shall be afraid of the ensign saith the lord whose
fire is in Zion and his furnace in Jerusalem.
behold a king shall reign in righteousness and princes shall
rule in judgment.
and a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind and a
covert from the tempest as rivers of water in a dry place as
the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.
and the eyes of them that see shall not be dim and the ears
of them that hear shall hearken.
the heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge and the
tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.
the vile person shall be no more called liberal nor the churl
said to be bountiful.
for the vile person will speak villany and his heart will
work iniquity to practise hypocrisy and to utter error
against the lord to make empty the soul of the hungry and he
will cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.
the instruments also of the churl are evil he deviseth wicked
devices to destroy the poor with lying words even when the
needy speaketh right.
but the liberal deviseth liberal things and by liberal things
shall he stand.
rise up ye women that are at ease hear my voice ye careless
daughters give ear unto my speech.
many days and years shall ye be troubled ye careless women
for the vintage shall fail the gathering shall not come.
tremble ye women that are at ease be troubled ye careless
ones strip you and make you bare and gird sackcloth upon
your loins.
they shall lament for the teats for the pleasant fields for
the fruitful vine.
upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers
yea upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city
because the palaces shall be forsaken the multitude of the
city shall be left the forts and towers shall be for dens for
ever a joy of wild asses a pasture of flocks
until the spirit be poured upon us from on high and the
wilderness be a fruitful field and the fruitful field be
counted for a forest.
then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness and righteousness
remain in the fruitful field.
and the work of righteousness shall be peace and the effect
of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.
and my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation and in
sure dwellings and in quiet resting places
when it shall hail coming down on the forest and the city
shall be low in a low place.
blessed are ye that sow beside all waters that send forth
thither the feet of the ox and the ass.
woe to thee that spoilest and thou wast not spoiled and
dealest treacherously and they dealt not treacherously with
thee when thou shalt cease to spoil thou shalt be spoiled
and when thou shalt make an end to deal treacherously they
shall deal treacherously with thee.
O lord be gracious unto us we have waited for thee be thou
their arm every morning our salvation also in the time of
trouble.
at the noise of the tumult the people fled at the lifting up
of thyself the nations were scattered.
and your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of the
caterpiller as the running to and fro of locusts shall he run
upon them.
the lord is exalted for he dwelleth on high he hath filled
Zion with judgment and righteousness.
and wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times
and strength of salvation the fear of the lord is his
treasure.
behold their valiant ones shall cry without the ambassadors
of peace shall weep bitterly.
the highways lie waste the wayfaring man ceaseth he hath
broken the covenant he hath despised the cities he regardeth
no man.
the earth mourneth and languisheth Lebanon is ashamed and
hewn down Sharon is like a wilderness and Bashan and Carmel
shake off their fruits.
now will I rise saith the lord now will I be exalted now
will I lift up myself.
ye shall conceive chaff ye shall bring forth stubble your
breath as fire shall devour you.
and the people shall be as the burnings of lime as thorns cut
up shall they be burned in the fire.
hear ye that are far off what I have done and ye that are
near acknowledge my might.
the sinners in Zion are afraid fearfulness hath surprised the
hypocrites. who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire?
who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?
he that walketh righteously and speaketh uprightly he that
despiseth the gain of oppressions that shaketh his hands from
holding of bribes that stoppeth his ears from hearing of
blood and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil
he shall dwell on high his place of defence shall be the
munitions of rocks bread shall be given him his waters shall
be sure.
thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty they shall behold
the land that is very far off.
thine heart shall meditate terror. where is the scribe? where
is the receiver? where is he that counted the towers?
thou shalt not see a fierce people a people of a deeper
speech than thou canst perceive of a stammering tongue that
thou canst not understand.
look upon Zion the city of our solemnities thine eyes shall
see Jerusalem a quiet habitation a tabernacle that shall not
be taken down not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be
removed Neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken.
but there the glorious lord will be unto us a place of broad
rivers and streams wherein shall go no galley with oars
Neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.
for the lord is our judge the lord is our lawgiver the lord
is our king he will save us.
thy tacklings are loosed they could not well strengthen their
mast they could not spread the sail then is the prey of a
great spoil divided the lame take the prey.
and the inhabitant shall not say I Am sick the people that
dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.
come near ye nations to hear and hearken ye people let
the earth hear and all that is therein the world and all
things that come forth of it.
for the indignation of the lord is upon all nations and his
fury upon all their armies he hath utterly destroyed them he
hath delivered them to the slaughter.
their slain also shall be cast out and their stink shall come
up out of their carcases and the mountains shall be melted
with their blood.
and all the host of heaven shall be dissolved and the heavens
shall be rolled together as a scroll and all their host shall
fall down as the leaf falleth off from the vine and as a
falling fig from the fig tree.
for my sword shall be bathed in heaven behold it shall come
down upon Idumea and upon the people of my curse to
judgment.
the sword of the lord is filled with blood it is made fat
with fatness and with the blood of lambs and goats with the
fat of the kidneys of rams for the lord hath a sacrifice in
Bozrah and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea.
and the unicorns shall come down with them and the bullocks
with the bulls and their land shall be soaked with blood and
their dust made fat with fatness.
for it is the day of the lord s vengeance and the year of
recompences for the controversy of Zion.
and the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch and the
dust thereof into brimstone and the land thereof shall become
burning pitch.
it shall not be quenched night nor day the smoke thereof
shall go up for ever from generation to generation it shall
lie waste none shall pass through it for ever and ever.
but the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it the owl
also and the raven shall dwell in it and he shall stretch out
upon it the line of confusion and the stones of emptiness.
they shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom but none
shall be there and all her princes shall be nothing.
and thorns shall come up in her palaces nettles and brambles
in the fortresses thereof and it shall be an habitation of
dragons and a court for owls.
the wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild
beasts of the island and the satyr shall cry to his fellow
the screech owl also shall rest there and find for herself a
place of rest.
there shall the great owl make her nest and lay and hatch
and gather under her shadow there shall the vultures also be
gathered every one with her mate.
seek ye out of the book of the lord and read no one of these
shall fail none shall want her mate for my mouth it hath
commanded and his spirit it hath gathered them.
and he hath cast the Lot for them and his hand hath divided
it unto them by line they shall possess it for ever from
generation to generation shall they dwell therein.
the wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them
and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose.
it shall blossom abundantly and rejoice even with joy and
singing the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it the
excellency of Carmel and Sharon they shall see the glory of
the lord and the excellency of our God.
strengthen ye the weak hands and confirm the feeble knees.
say to them that are of a fearful heart be strong fear not
behold your God will come with vengeance even God with a
recompence he will come and save you.
then the eyes of the blind shall be opened and the ears of
the deaf shall be unstopped.
then shall the lame man leap as an hart and the tongue of the
dumb sing for in the wilderness shall waters break out and
streams in the desert.
and the parched ground shall become a pool and the thirsty
land springs of water in the habitation of dragons where
each lay shall be grass with reeds and rushes.
and an highway shall be there and a way and it shall be
called the way of holiness the unclean shall not pass over
it but it shall be for those the wayfaring men though
fools shall not err therein.
no lion shall be there nor any ravenous beast shall go up
thereon it shall not be found there but the redeemed shall
walk there
and the ransomed of the lord shall return and come to Zion
with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads they shall
obtain joy and gladness and sorrow and sighing shall flee
away.
now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah
that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the
defenced cities of Judah and took them.
and the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to
Jerusalem unto king Hezekiah with a great army. and he stood
by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the
fuller s field.
then came forth unto him Eliakim Hilkiah s son which was
over the house and Shebna the scribe and Joah Asaph s son
the recorder.
and Rabshakeh said unto them say ye now to Hezekiah thus
saith the great king the king of Assyria what confidence is
this wherein thou trustest?
I say sayest thou but they are but vain words I have
counsel and strength for war now on whom dost thou trust
that thou rebellest against me?
lo thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed on Egypt
whereon if a man lean it will go into his hand and pierce
it so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in him.
but if thou say to me we trust in the lord our God is it not
he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken
away and said to Judah and to Jerusalem ye shall worship
before this altar?
now therefore give pledges I pray thee to my Master the king
of Assyria and I will give thee two thousand horses if thou
be able on thy part to set riders upon them.
how then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the
least of my Master s servants and put thy trust on Egypt for
chariots and for horsemen?
and Am I now come up without the lord against this land to
destroy it? the lord said unto me go up against this land
and destroy it.
then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh speak I
pray thee unto thy servants in the Syrian language for we
understand it and speak not to us in the Jews language in
the ears of the people that are on the wall.
but Rabshakeh said hath my Master sent me to thy Master and
to thee to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men
that sit upon the wall that they may eat their own dung and
drink their own piss with you?
then Rabshakeh stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jews
language and said hear ye the words of the great king the
king of Assyria.
thus saith the king let not Hezekiah deceive you for he
shall not be able to deliver you.
Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the lord saying the
lord will surely deliver us this city shall not be delivered
into the hand of the king of Assyria.
hearken not to Hezekiah for thus saith the king of Assyria
make an agreement with me by a present and come out to me
and eat ye every one of his vine and every one of his fig
tree and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern
until I come and take you away to a land like your own land a
land of corn and wine a land of bread and vineyards.
beware lest Hezekiah persuade you saying the lord will
deliver us. hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his
land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
where are the gods of Hamath and Arphad? where are the gods of
Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?
who are they among all the gods of these lands that have
delivered their land out of my hand that the lord should
deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?
but they held their peace and answered him not a word for
the king s commandment was saying answer him not.
then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah that was over the
household and Shebna the scribe and Joah the son of Asaph
the recorder to Hezekiah with their clothes rent and told
him the words of Rabshakeh.
and it came to pass when king Hezekiah heard it that he rent
his clothes and covered himself with sackcloth and went into
the house of the lord.
and he sent Eliakim who was over the household and Shebna
the scribe and the elders of the priests covered with
sackcloth unto Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.
and they said unto him thus saith Hezekiah this day is a day
of trouble and of rebuke and of blasphemy for the children
are come to the birth and there is not strength to bring
forth.
it may be the lord thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh
whom the king of Assyria his Master hath sent to reproach the
living God and will reprove the words which the lord thy God
hath heard wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that
is left.
so the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
and Isaiah said unto them thus shall ye say unto your Master
thus saith the lord be not afraid of the words that thou hast
heard wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have
blasphemed me.
behold I will send a blast upon him and he shall hear a
rumour and return to his own land and I will cause him to
fall by the sword in his own land.
so Rabshakeh returned and found the king of Assyria warring
against Libnah for he had heard that he was departed from
Lachish.
and he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia he is
come forth to make war with thee. and when he heard it he
sent messengers to Hezekiah saying
thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah saying let not
thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee saying
Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of
Assyria.
behold thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to
all lands by destroying them utterly and shalt thou be
delivered?
have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers
have destroyed as Gozan and Haran and Rezeph and the
children of Eden which were in Telassar?
where is the king of Hamath and the king of Arphad and the
king of the city of Sepharvaim Hena and Ivah?
and Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the
messengers and read it and Hezekiah went up unto the house
of the lord and spread it before the lord.
and Hezekiah prayed unto the lord saying
O lord of hosts God of Israel that dwellest between the
Cherubims thou art the God even thou alone of all the
kingdoms of the earth thou hast made heaven and earth.
incline thine ear O lord and hear open thine eyes O lord
and see and hear all the words of Sennacherib which hath
sent to reproach the living God.
of a truth lord the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the
nations and their countries
and have cast their gods into the fire for they were no gods
but the work of men s hands wood and stone therefore they
have destroyed them.
now therefore O lord our God save us from his hand that all
the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the lord
even thou only.
then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah saying thus
saith the lord God of Israel whereas thou hast prayed to me
against Sennacherib king of Assyria
this is the word which the lord hath spoken concerning him
the virgin the daughter of Zion hath despised thee and
laughed thee to scorn the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken
her head at thee.
whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom
hast thou exalted thy voice and lifted up thine eyes on high?
even against the holy one of Israel.
by thy servants hast thou reproached the lord and hast said
by the multitude of my chariots Am I come up to the height of
the mountains to the sides of Lebanon and I will cut down
the tall cedars thereof and the choice fir trees thereof and
I will enter into the height of his border and the forest of
his Carmel.
I have digged and drunk water and with the sole of my feet
have I dried up all the rivers of the besieged places.
hast thou not heard long ago how I have done it and of
ancient times that I have formed it? now have I brought it to
pass that thou shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities into
ruinous heaps.
therefore their inhabitants were of small power they were
dismayed and confounded they were as the grass of the field
and as the green herb as the grass on the housetops and as
corn blasted before it be grown up.
but I know thy abode and thy going out and thy coming in
and thy rage against me.
because thy rage against me and thy tumult is come up into
mine ears therefore will I put my hook in thy nose and my
bridle in thy lips and I will turn thee back by the way by
which thou camest.
and this shall be a sign unto thee ye shall eat this year
such as groweth of itself and the second year that which
springeth of the same and in the third year sow ye and reap
and plant vineyards and eat the fruit thereof.
and the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall
again take root downward and bear fruit upward
for out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant and they that
escape out of mount Zion the zeal of the lord of hosts shall
do this.
therefore thus saith the lord concerning the king of Assyria
he shall not come into this city nor shoot an arrow there
nor come before it with shields nor cast a bank against it.
by the way that he came by the same shall he return and
shall not come into this city saith the lord.
for I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake and
for my servant David s sake.
then the angel of the lord went forth and smote in the camp
of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand
and when they arose early in the morning behold they were
all dead corpses.
so Sennacherib king of Assyria departed and went and
returned and dwelt at Nineveh.
and it came to pass as he was worshipping in the house of
Nisroch his God that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote
him with the sword and they escaped into the land of Armenia
and Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.
in those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. and Isaiah the
prophet the son of Amoz came unto him and said unto him thus
saith the lord set thine house in order for thou shalt die
and not live.
then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall and prayed unto
the lord
and said remember now O lord I beseech thee how I have
walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart and have
done that which is good in thy sight. and Hezekiah wept sore.
then came the word of the lord to Isaiah saying
go and say to Hezekiah thus saith the lord the God of David
thy father I have heard thy prayer I have seen thy tears
behold I will add unto thy days fifteen years.
and I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the
king of Assyria and I will defend this city.
and this shall be a sign unto thee from the lord that the
lord will do this thing that he hath spoken
behold I will bring again the shadow of the degrees which is
gone down in the sun dial of Ahaz Ten degrees backward. so
the sun returned Ten degrees by which degrees it was gone
down.
the writing of Hezekiah king of Judah when he had been sick
and was recovered of his sickness
I said in the cutting off of my days I shall go to the gates
of the grave I Am deprived of the residue of my years.
I said I shall not see the lord even the lord in the land
of the living I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants
of the world.
mine age is departed and is removed from me as a Shepherd s
tent I have cut off like a weaver my life he will cut me off
with pining sickness from day even to night wilt thou make an
end of me.
I reckoned till morning that as a lion so will he break all
my bones from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.
like a crane or a swallow so did I chatter I did mourn as a
dove mine eyes fail with looking upward O lord I Am
oppressed undertake for me.
what shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me and himself
hath done it I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness
of my soul.
O lord by these things men live and in all these things is
the life of my spirit so wilt thou recover me and make me to
live.
behold for peace I had great bitterness but thou hast in
love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption for
thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.
for the grave cannot praise thee death can not celebrate
thee they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy
truth.
the living the living he shall praise thee as I do this
day the father to the children shall make known thy truth.
the lord was ready to save me therefore we will sing my songs
to the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the
house of the lord.
for Isaiah had said let them take a lump of figs and lay it
for a plaister upon the boil and he shall recover.
Hezekiah also had said what is the sign that I shall go up to
the house of the lord?
at that time Merodachbaladan the son of Baladan king of
Babylon sent letters and a present to Hezekiah for he had
heard that he had been sick and was recovered.
and Hezekiah was glad of them and shewed them the house of
his precious things the Silver and the gold and the spices
and the precious ointment and all the house of his armour
and all that was found in his treasures there was nothing in
his house nor in all his dominion that Hezekiah shewed them
not.
then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah and said unto
him what said these men? and from whence came they unto thee?
and Hezekiah said they are come from a far country unto me
even from Babylon.
then said he what have they seen in thine house? and Hezekiah
answered all that is in mine house have they seen there is
nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them.
then said Isaiah to Hezekiah hear the word of the lord of
hosts
behold the days come that all that is in thine house and
that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day
shall be carried to Babylon nothing shall be left saith the
lord.
and of thy sons that shall issue from thee which thou shalt
beget shall they take away and they shall be eunuchs in the
palace of the king of Babylon.
then said Hezekiah to Isaiah good is the word of the lord
which thou hast spoken. he said moreover for there shall be
peace and truth in my days.
comfort ye comfort ye my people saith your God.
speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem and cry unto her that her
warfare is accomplished that her iniquity is pardoned for
she hath received of the lord s hand double for all her sins.
the voice of him that crieth in the wilderness prepare ye the
way of the lord make straight in the desert a highway for our
God.
every valley shall be exalted and every mountain and hill
shall be made low and the crooked shall be made straight and
the rough places plain
and the glory of the lord shall be revealed and all flesh
shall see it together for the mouth of the lord hath spoken
it.
the voice said cry. and he said what shall I cry? all flesh
is grass and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of
the field
the grass withereth the flower fadeth because the spirit of
the lord bloweth upon it surely the people is grass.
the grass withereth the flower fadeth but the word of our
God shall stand for ever.
O Zion that bringest good tidings get thee up into the high
mountain O Jerusalem that bringest good tidings lift up thy
voice with strength lift it up be not afraid say unto the
cities of Judah behold your God
behold the lord God will come with strong hand and his arm
shall rule for him behold his reward is with him and his
work before him.
he shall feed his flock like a Shepherd he shall gather the
lambs with his arm and carry them in his bosom and shall
gently lead those that are with young.
who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand and
meted out heaven with the span and comprehended the dust of
the earth in a measure and weighed the mountains in scales
and the hills in a balance?
who hath directed the spirit of the lord or being his
counsellor hath taught him?
with whom took he counsel and who instructed him and taught
him in the path of judgment and taught him knowledge and
shewed to him the way of understanding?
behold the nations are as a drop of a bucket and are counted
as the small dust of the balance behold he taketh up the
isles as a very little thing.
and Lebanon is not sufficient to burn nor the beasts thereof
sufficient for a burnt offering.
all nations before him are as nothing and they are counted to
him less than nothing and vanity.
to whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye
compare unto him?
the workman melteth a graven image and the goldsmith
spreadeth it over with gold and casteth Silver chains.
he that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a
tree that will not rot he seeketh unto him a cunning workman
to prepare a graven image that shall not be moved.
have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told
you from the beginning? have ye not understood from the
foundations of the earth?
it is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth and the
inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers that stretcheth out
the heavens as a curtain and spreadeth them out as a tent to
dwell in
that bringeth the princes to nothing he maketh the judges of
the earth as vanity.
yea they shall not be planted yea they shall not be sown
yea their stock shall not take root in the earth and he
shall also blow upon them and they shall wither and the
whirlwind shall take them away as stubble.
to whom then will ye liken me or shall I be equal? saith the
holy one.
lift up your eyes on high and behold who hath created these
things that bringeth out their host by number he calleth
them all by names by the greatness of his might for that he
is strong in power not one faileth.
why sayest thou O Jacob and speakest O Israel my way is
hid from the lord and my judgment is passed over from my God?
hast thou not known? hast thou not heard that the everlasting
God the lord the creator of the ends of the earth fainteth
not Neither is weary? there is no searching of his
understanding.
he giveth power to the faint and to them that have no might
he increaseth strength.
even the youths shall faint and be weary and the young men
shall utterly fall
but they that wait upon the lord shall renew their strength
they shall mount up with wings as eagles they shall run and
not be weary and they shall walk and not faint.
keep silence before me O islands and let the people renew
their strength let them come near then let them speak let
us come near together to judgment.
who raised up the righteous man from the east called him to
his foot gave the nations before him and made him rule over
kings? he gave them as the dust to his sword and as driven
stubble to his bow.
he pursued them and passed safely even by the way that he
had not gone with his feet.
who hath wrought and done it calling the generations from the
beginning? I the lord the first and with the last I Am he.
the isles saw it and feared the ends of the earth were
afraid drew near and came.
they helped every one his neighbour and every one said to his
brother be of good courage.
so the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith and he that
smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil saying it
is ready for the sodering and he fastened it with nails that
it should not be moved.
but thou Israel art my servant Jacob whom I have chosen
the seed of Abraham my friend.
thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth and called
thee from the chief men thereof and said unto thee thou art
my servant I have chosen thee and not cast thee away.
fear thou not for I Am with thee be not dismayed for I Am
thy God I will strengthen thee yea I will help thee yea I
will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.
behold all they that were incensed against thee shall be
ashamed and confounded they shall be as nothing and they
that strive with thee shall perish.
thou shalt seek them and shalt not find them even them that
contended with thee they that war against thee shall be as
nothing and as a thing of nought.
for I the lord thy God will hold thy right hand saying unto
thee fear not I will help thee.
fear not thou worm Jacob and ye men of Israel I will help
thee saith the lord and thy redeemer the holy one of
Israel.
behold I will make thee a new Sharp threshing instrument
having teeth thou shalt thresh the mountains and beat them
small and shalt make the hills as chaff.
thou shalt fan them and the wind shall carry them away and
the whirlwind shall scatter them and thou shalt rejoice in
the lord and shalt glory in the holy one of Israel.
when the poor and needy seek water and there is none and
their tongue faileth for thirst I the lord will hear them I
the God of Israel will not forsake them.
I will open rivers in high places and fountains in the midst
of the valleys I will make the wilderness a pool of water
and the dry land springs of water.
I will plant in the wilderness the cedar the shittah tree
and the myrtle and the oil tree I will set in the desert the
fir tree and the pine and the box tree together
that they may see and know and consider and understand
together that the hand of the lord hath done this and the
holy one of Israel hath created it.
produce your cause saith the lord bring forth your strong
reasons saith the king of Jacob.
let them bring them forth and shew us what shall happen let
them shew the former things what they be that we may
consider them and know the latter end of them or declare us
things for to come.
shew the things that are to come hereafter that we may know
that ye are gods yea do good or do evil that we may be
dismayed and behold it together.
behold ye are of nothing and your work of nought an
abomination is he that chooseth you.
I have raised up one from the north and he shall come from
the rising of the sun shall he call upon my name and he shall
come upon princes as upon morter and as the potter treadeth
clay.
who hath declared from the beginning that we may know? and
beforetime that we may say he is righteous? yea there is
none that sheweth yea there is none that declareth yea
there is none that heareth your words.
the first shall say to Zion behold behold them and I will
give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.
for I beheld and there was no man even among them and there
was no counsellor that when I asked of them could answer a
word.
behold they are all vanity their works are nothing their
molten images are wind and confusion.
behold my servant whom I uphold mine elect in whom my soul
delighteth I have put my spirit upon him he shall bring
forth judgment to the Gentiles.
he shall not cry nor lift up nor cause his voice to be heard
in the street.
a bruised reed shall he not break and the smoking flax shall
he not quench he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.
he shall not fail nor be discouraged till he have set
judgment in the earth and the isles shall wait for his law.
thus saith God the lord he that created the heavens and
stretched them out he that spread forth the earth and that
which cometh out of it he that giveth breath unto the people
upon it and spirit to them that walk therein
I the lord have called thee in righteousness and will hold
thine hand and will keep thee and give thee for a covenant
of the people for a light of the Gentiles
to open the blind eyes to bring out the prisoners from the
prison and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.
I Am the lord that is my name and my glory will I not give
to another Neither my praise to graven images.
behold the former things are come to pass and new things do
I declare before they spring forth I tell you of them.
sing unto the lord a new song and his praise from the end of
the earth ye that go down to the sea and all that is
therein the isles and the inhabitants thereof.
let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice
the villages that Kedar doth inhabit let the inhabitants of
the rock sing let them shout from the top of the mountains.
let them give glory unto the lord and declare his praise in
the islands.
the lord shall go forth as a Mighty man he shall stir up
jealousy like a man of war he shall cry yea roar he shall
prevail against his enemies.
I have long time holden my peace I have been still and
refrained myself now will I cry like a travailing woman I
will destroy and devour at once.
I will make waste mountains and hills and dry up all their
herbs and I will make the rivers islands and I will dry up
the pools.
and I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not I will
lead them in paths that they have not known I will make
darkness light before them and crooked things straight. these
things will I do unto them and not forsake them.
they shall be turned back they shall be greatly ashamed that
trust in graven images that say to the molten images ye are
our gods.
hear ye deaf and look ye blind that ye may see.
who is blind but my servant? or deaf as my messenger that I
sent? who is blind as he that is perfect and blind as the
lord s servant?
seeing many things but thou observest not opening the ears
but he heareth not.
the lord is well pleased for his righteousness sake he will
magnify the law and make it honourable.
but this is a people robbed and spoiled they are all of them
snared in holes and they are hid in prison houses they are
for a prey and none delivereth for a spoil and none saith
restore.
who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear
for the time to come?
who gave Jacob for a spoil and Israel to the robbers? did not
the lord he against whom we have sinned? for they would not
walk in his ways Neither were they obedient unto his law.
therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger and
the strength of battle and it hath set him on fire round
about yet he knew not and it burned him yet he laid it not
to heart.
but now thus saith the lord that created thee O Jacob and he
that formed thee O Israel fear not for I have redeemed
thee I have called thee by thy name thou art mine.
when thou passest through the waters I will be with thee and
through the rivers they shall not overflow thee when thou
walkest through the fire thou shalt not be burned Neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee.
for I Am the lord thy God the holy one of Israel thy
saviour I gave Egypt for thy ransom Ethiopia and Seba for
thee.
since thou wast precious in my sight thou hast been
honourable and I have loved thee therefore will I give men
for thee and people for thy life.
fear not for I Am with thee I will bring thy seed from the
east and gather thee from the west
I will say to the north give up and to the south keep not
back bring my sons from far and my daughters from the ends
of the earth
even every one that is called by my name for I have created
him for my glory I have formed him yea I have made him.
bring forth the blind people that have eyes and the deaf that
have ears.
let all the nations be gathered together and let the people
be assembled who among them can declare this and shew us
former things? let them bring forth their witnesses that they
may be justified or let them hear and say it is truth.
ye are my witnesses saith the lord and my servant whom I
have chosen that ye may know and believe me and understand
that I Am he before me there was no God formed Neither shall
there be after me.
I even I Am the lord and beside me there is no saviour.
I have declared and have saved and I have shewed when there
was no strange God among you therefore ye are my witnesses
saith the lord that I Am God.
yea before the day was I Am he and there is none that can
deliver out of my hand I will work and who shall let it?
thus saith the lord your redeemer the holy one of Israel
for your sake I have sent to Babylon and have brought down
all their nobles and the Chaldeans whose cry is in the
ships.
I Am the lord your holy one the creator of Israel your
king.
thus saith the lord which maketh a way in the sea and a path
in the Mighty waters
which bringeth forth the chariot and horse the army and the
power they shall lie down together they shall not rise they
are extinct they are quenched as tow.
remember ye not the former things Neither consider the things
of old.
behold I will do a new thing now it shall spring forth
shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the
wilderness and rivers in the desert.
the beast of the field shall honour me the dragons and the
owls because I give waters in the wilderness and rivers in
the desert to give drink to my people my chosen.
this people have I formed for myself they shall shew forth my
praise.
but thou hast not called upon me O Jacob but thou hast been
weary of me O Israel.
thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt
offerings Neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices.
I have not caused thee to serve with an offering nor wearied
thee with incense.
thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money Neither hast
thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices but thou hast
made me to serve with thy sins thou hast wearied me with
thine iniquities.
I even I Am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine
own sake and will not remember thy sins.
put me in remembrance let us plead together declare thou
that thou mayest be justified.
thy first father hath sinned and thy teachers have
transgressed against me.
therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary and
have given Jacob to the curse and Israel to reproaches.
yet now hear O Jacob my servant and Israel whom I have
chosen
thus saith the lord that made thee and formed thee from the
womb which will help thee fear not O Jacob my servant and
thou Jesurun whom I have chosen.
for I will pour water upon him that is thirsty and floods
upon the dry ground I will pour my spirit upon thy seed and
my blessing upon thine offspring
and they shall spring up as among the grass as willows by the
water courses.
one shall say I Am the lord s and another shall call himself
by the name of Jacob and another shall subscribe with his
hand unto the lord and surname himself by the name of Israel.
thus saith the lord the king of Israel and his redeemer the
lord of hosts I Am the first and I Am the last and beside
me there is no God.
and who as I shall call and shall declare it and set it in
order for me since I appointed the ancient people? and the
things that are coming and shall come let them shew unto
them.
fear ye not Neither be afraid have not I told thee from that
time and have declared it? ye are even my witnesses. is there
a God beside me? yea there is no God I know not any.
they that make a graven image are all of them vanity and
their delectable things shall not profit and they are their
own witnesses they see not nor know that they may be
ashamed.
who hath formed a God or molten a graven image that is
profitable for nothing?
behold all his fellows shall be ashamed and the workmen
they are of men let them all be gathered together let them
stand up yet they shall fear and they shall be ashamed
together.
the smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals and
fashioneth it with hammers and worketh it with the strength
of his arms yea he is hungry and his strength faileth he
drinketh no water and is faint.
the carpenter stretcheth out his rule he marketh it out with
a line he fitteth it with planes and he marketh it out with
the compass and maketh it after the figure of a man
according to the beauty of a man that it may remain in the
house.
he heweth him down cedars and taketh the cypress and the oak
which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the
forest he planteth an ash and the rain doth nourish it.
then shall it be for a man to burn for he will take thereof
and warm himself yea he kindleth it and baketh bread yea
he maketh a God and worshippeth it he maketh it a graven
image and falleth down thereto.
he burneth part thereof in the fire with part thereof he
eateth flesh he roasteth roast and is satisfied yea he
warmeth himself and saith aha I Am warm I have seen the
fire
and the residue thereof he maketh a God even his graven
image he falleth down unto it and worshippeth it and
prayeth unto it and saith deliver me for thou art my God.
they have not known nor understood for he hath shut their
eyes that they cannot see and their hearts that they cannot
understand.
and none considereth in his heart Neither is there knowledge
nor understanding to say I have burned part of it in the
fire yea also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof I
have roasted flesh and eaten it and shall I make the residue
thereof an abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a
tree?
he feedeth on ashes a deceived heart hath turned him aside
that he cannot deliver his soul nor say is there not a lie
in my right hand?
remember these O Jacob and Israel for thou art my servant I
have formed thee thou art my servant O Israel thou shalt
not be forgotten of me.
I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions and
as a cloud thy sins return unto me for I have redeemed
thee.
sing O ye heavens for the lord hath done it shout ye lower
parts of the earth break forth into singing ye mountains O
forest and every tree therein for the lord hath redeemed
Jacob and glorified himself in Israel.
thus saith the lord thy redeemer and he that formed thee
from the womb I Am the lord that maketh all things that
stretcheth forth the heavens alone that spreadeth abroad the
earth by myself
that frustrateth the tokens of the liars and maketh diviners
mad that turneth wise men backward and maketh their
knowledge foolish
that confirmeth the word of his servant and performeth the
counsel of his messengers that saith to Jerusalem thou shalt
be inhabited and to the cities of Judah ye shall be built
and I will raise up the decayed places thereof
that saith to the deep be dry and I will dry up thy rivers
that saith of Cyrus he is my Shepherd and shall perform all
my pleasure even saying to Jerusalem thou shalt be built
and to the temple thy foundation shall be laid.
thus saith the lord to his anointed to Cyrus whose right
hand I have holden to subdue nations before him and I will
loose the loins of kings to open before him the two leaved
gates and the gates shall not be shut
I will go before thee and make the crooked places straight I
will break in pieces the gates of brass and cut in sunder the
bars of Iron
and I will give thee the treasures of darkness and hidden
Riches of secret places that thou mayest know that I the
lord which call thee by thy name Am the God of Israel.
for Jacob my servant s sake and Israel mine elect I have
even called thee by thy name I have surnamed thee though
thou hast not known me.
I Am the lord and there is none else there is no God beside
me I girded thee though thou hast not known me
that they may know from the rising of the sun and from the
west that there is none beside me. I Am the lord and there
is none else.
I form the light and create darkness I make peace and
create evil I the lord do all these things.
drop down ye heavens from above and let the skies pour down
righteousness let the earth open and let them bring forth
salvation and let righteousness spring up together I the
lord have created it.
woe unto him that striveth with his maker let the potsherd
strive with the potsherds of the earth. shall the clay say to
him that fashioneth it what makest thou? or thy work he hath
no hands?
woe unto him that saith unto his father what begettest thou?
or to the woman what hast thou brought forth?
thus saith the lord the holy one of Israel and his maker
ask me of things to come concerning my sons and concerning
the work of my hands command ye me.
I have made the earth and created man upon it I even my
hands have stretched out the heavens and all their host have
I commanded.
I have raised him up in righteousness and I will direct all
his ways he shall build my city and he shall let go my
captives not for price nor reward saith the lord of hosts.
thus saith the lord the labour of Egypt and merchandise of
Ethiopia and of the Sabeans men of stature shall come over
unto thee and they shall be thine they shall come after
thee in chains they shall come over and they shall fall down
unto thee they shall make supplication unto thee saying
surely God is in thee and there is none else there is no
God.
verily thou art a God that hidest thyself O God of Israel
the saviour.
they shall be ashamed and also confounded all of them they
shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols.
but Israel shall be saved in the lord with an everlasting
salvation ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world
without end.
for thus saith the lord that created the heavens God himself
that formed the earth and made it he hath established it he
created it not in vain he formed it to be inhabited I Am the
lord and there is none else.
I have not spoken in secret in a dark place of the earth I
said not unto the seed of Jacob seek ye me in vain I the
lord speak righteousness I declare things that are right.
assemble yourselves and come draw near together ye that are
escaped of the nations they have no knowledge that set up the
wood of their graven image and pray unto a God that cannot
save.
tell ye and bring them near yea let them take counsel
together who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath
told it from that time? have not I the lord? and there is no
God else beside me a just God and a saviour there is none
beside me.
look unto me and be ye saved all the ends of the earth for
I Am God and there is none else.
I have sworn by myself the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness and shall not return that unto me every knee
shall bow every tongue shall swear.
surely shall one say in the lord have I righteousness and
strength even to him shall men come and all that are
incensed against him shall be ashamed.
in the lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified and
shall glory.
Bel boweth down Nebo stoopeth their idols were upon the
beasts and upon the cattle your carriages were heavy loaden
they are a burden to the weary beast.
they stoop they bow down together they could not deliver the
burden but themselves are gone into captivity.
hearken unto me O house of Jacob and all the remnant of the
house of Israel which are borne by me from the belly which
are carried from the womb
and even to your old age I Am he and even to hoar hairs will
I carry you I have made and I will bear even I will carry
and will deliver you.
to whom will ye liken me and make me equal and compare me
that we may be like?
they lavish gold out of the bag and weigh Silver in the
balance and hire a goldsmith and he maketh it a God they
fall down yea they worship.
they bear him upon the shoulder they carry him and set him
in his place and he standeth from his place shall he not
remove yea one shall cry unto him yet can he not answer
nor save him out of his trouble.
remember this and shew yourselves men bring it again to
mind O ye transgressors.
remember the former things of old for I Am God and there is
none else I Am God and there is none like me
declaring the end from the beginning and from ancient times
the things that are not yet done saying my counsel shall
stand and I will do all my pleasure
calling a ravenous bird from the east the man that executeth
my counsel from a far country yea I have spoken it I will
also bring it to pass I have purposed it I will also do it.
hearken unto me ye stouthearted that are far from
righteousness
I bring near my righteousness it shall not be far off and my
salvation shall not tarry and I will place salvation in Zion
for Israel my glory.
come down and sit in the dust O virgin daughter of Babylon
sit on the ground there is no throne O daughter of the
Chaldeans for thou shalt no more be called tender and
delicate.
take the millstones and grind meal uncover thy locks make
bare the leg uncover the thigh pass over the rivers.
thy nakedness shall be uncovered yea thy shame shall be
seen I will take vengeance and I will not meet thee as a
man.
as for our redeemer the lord of hosts is his name the holy
one of Israel.
sit thou silent and get thee into darkness O daughter of the
Chaldeans for thou shalt no more be called the lady of
kingdoms.
I was wroth with my people I have polluted mine inheritance
and given them into thine hand thou didst shew them no mercy
upon the ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke.
and thou saidst I shall be a lady for ever so that thou
didst not lay these things to thy heart Neither didst
remember the latter end of it.
therefore hear now this thou that art given to pleasures
that dwellest carelessly that sayest in thine heart I Am
and none else beside me I shall not sit as a widow Neither
shall I know the loss of children
but these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one
day the loss of children and widowhood they shall come upon
thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries
and for the great abundance of thine enchantments.
for thou hast trusted in thy wickedness thou hast said none
seeth me. thy wisdom and thy knowledge it hath perverted
thee and thou hast said in thine heart I Am and none else
beside me.
therefore shall evil come upon thee thou shalt not know from
whence it riseth and mischief shall fall upon thee thou
shalt not be able to put it off and desolation shall come
upon thee suddenly which thou shalt not know.
stand now with thine enchantments and with the multitude of
thy sorceries wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth if
so be thou shalt be able to profit if so be thou mayest
prevail.
thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. let now the
astrologers the stargazers the monthly prognosticators
stand up and save thee from these things that shall come upon
thee.
behold they shall be as stubble the fire shall burn them
they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame
there shall not be a coal to warm at nor fire to sit before
it.
thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured
even thy merchants from thy youth they shall wander every
one to his quarter none shall save thee.
hear ye this O house of Jacob which are called by the name
of Israel and are come forth out of the waters of Judah
which swear by the name of the lord and make mention of the
God of Israel but not in truth nor in righteousness.
for they call themselves of the holy city and stay themselves
upon the God of Israel the lord of hosts is his name.
I have declared the former things from the beginning and they
went forth out of my mouth and I shewed them I did them
suddenly and they came to pass.
because I knew that thou art obstinate and thy neck is an
Iron sinew and thy brow brass
I have even from the beginning declared it to thee before it
came to pass I shewed it thee lest thou shouldest say mine
idol hath done them and my graven image and my molten image
hath commanded them.
thou hast heard see all this and will not ye declare it? I
have shewed thee new things from this time even hidden
things and thou didst not know them.
they are created now and not from the beginning even before
the day when thou heardest them not lest thou shouldest say
behold I knew them.
yea thou heardest not yea thou knewest not yea from that
time that thine ear was not opened for I knew that thou
wouldest deal very treacherously and wast called a
transgressor from the womb.
for my name s sake will I defer mine anger and for my praise
will I refrain for thee that I cut thee not off.
behold I have refined thee but not with Silver I have
chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.
for mine own sake even for mine own sake will I do it for
how should my name be polluted? and I will not give my glory
unto another.
hearken unto me O Jacob and Israel my called I Am he I Am
the first I also Am the last.
mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth and my
right hand hath spanned the heavens when I call unto them
they stand up together.
all ye assemble yourselves and hear which among them hath
declared these things? the lord hath loved him he will do his
pleasure on Babylon and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans.
I even I have spoken yea I have called him I have brought
him and he shall make his way prosperous.
come ye near unto me hear ye this I have not spoken in
secret from the beginning from the time that it was there Am
I and now the lord God and his spirit hath sent me.
thus saith the lord thy redeemer the holy one of Israel I
Am the lord thy God which teacheth thee to profit which
leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go.
O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments then had thy
peace been as a river and thy righteousness as the waves of
the sea
thy seed also had been as the sand and the offspring of thy
bowels like the gravel thereof his name should not have been
cut off nor destroyed from before me.
go ye forth of Babylon flee ye from the Chaldeans with a
voice of singing declare ye tell this utter it even to the
end of the earth say ye the lord hath redeemed his servant
Jacob.
and they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts he
caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them he clave
the rock also and the waters gushed out.
there is no peace saith the lord unto the wicked.
listen O isles unto me and hearken ye people from far
the lord hath called me from the womb from the bowels of my
mother hath he made mention of my name.
and he hath made my mouth like a Sharp sword in the shadow of
his hand hath he hid me and made me a polished shaft in his
quiver hath he hid me
and said unto me thou art my servant O Israel in whom I
will be glorified.
then I said I have laboured in vain I have spent my strength
for nought and in vain yet surely my judgment is with the
lord and my work with my God.
and now saith the lord that formed me from the womb to be his
servant to bring Jacob again to him though Israel be not
gathered yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the lord and
my God shall be my strength.
and he said it is a light thing that thou shouldest be my
servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob and to restore the
preserved of Israel I will also give thee for a light to the
Gentiles that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the
earth.
thus saith the lord the redeemer of Israel and his holy one
to him whom man despiseth to him whom the nation abhorreth
to a servant of rulers kings shall see and Arise princes
also shall worship because of the lord that is faithful and
the holy one of Israel and he shall choose thee.
thus saith the lord in an acceptable time have I heard thee
and in a day of salvation have I helped thee and I will
preserve thee and give thee for a covenant of the people to
establish the earth to cause to inherit the desolate
heritages
that thou mayest say to the prisoners go forth to them that
are in darkness shew yourselves. they shall feed in the ways
and their pastures shall be in all high places.
they shall not hunger nor thirst Neither shall the heat nor
sun smite them for he that hath mercy on them shall lead
them even by the springs of water shall he guide them.
and I will make all my mountains a way and my highways shall
be exalted.
behold these shall come from far and lo these from the
north and from the west and these from the land of Sinim.
sing O heavens and be joyful O earth and break forth into
singing O mountains for the lord hath comforted his people
and will have mercy upon his afflicted.
but Zion said the lord hath forsaken me and my lord hath
forgotten me.
can a woman forget her sucking child that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea they may forget yet
will I not forget thee.
behold I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands thy
walls are continually before me.
thy children shall make haste thy destroyers and they that
made thee waste shall go forth of thee.
lift up thine eyes round about and behold all these gather
themselves together and come to thee. as I live saith the
lord thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all as with an
ornament and bind them on thee as a bride doeth.
for thy waste and thy desolate places and the land of thy
destruction shall even now be too narrow by reason of the
inhabitants and they that swallowed thee up shall be far
away.
the children which thou shalt have after thou hast lost the
other shall say again in thine ears the place is too strait
for me give place to me that I may dwell.
then shalt thou say in thine heart who hath begotten me
these seeing I have lost my children and Am desolate a
captive and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up
these? behold I was left alone these where had they been?
thus saith the lord God behold I will lift up mine hand to
the Gentiles and set up my standard to the people and they
shall bring thy sons in their arms and thy daughters shall be
carried upon their shoulders.
and kings shall be thy nursing fathers and their queens thy
nursing mothers they shall bow down to thee with their face
toward the earth and lick up the dust of thy feet and thou
shalt know that I Am the lord for they shall not be ashamed
that wait for me.
shall the prey be taken from the Mighty or the lawful captive
delivered?
but thus saith the lord even the captives of the Mighty shall
be taken away and the prey of the terrible shall be
delivered for I will contend with him that contendeth with
thee and I will save thy children.
and I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh
and they shall be drunken with their own blood as with sweet
wine and all flesh shall know that I the lord Am thy saviour
and thy redeemer the Mighty one of Jacob.
thus saith the lord where is the bill of your mother s
divorcement whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is
it to whom I have sold you? behold for your iniquities have
ye sold yourselves and for your transgressions is your mother
put away.
wherefore when I came was there no man? when I called was
there none to answer? is my hand shortened at all that it
cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold at my
rebuke I dry up the sea I make the rivers a wilderness their
fish stinketh because there is no water and dieth for
thirst.
I clothe the heavens with blackness and I make sackcloth
their covering.
the lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned that I
should know how to speak a word in season to him that is
weary he wakeneth morning by morning he wakeneth mine ear to
hear as the learned.
the lord God hath opened mine ear and I was not rebellious
Neither turned away back.
I gave my back to the smiters and my cheeks to them that
plucked off the hair I hid not my face from shame and
spitting.
for the lord God will help me therefore shall I not be
confounded therefore have I set my face like a flint and I
know that I shall not be ashamed.
he is near that justifieth me who will contend with me? let
us stand together who is mine adversary? let him come near to
me.
behold the lord God will help me who is he that shall
condemn me? lo they all shall wax old as a garment the moth
shall eat them up.
who is among you that feareth the lord that obeyeth the voice
of his servant that walketh in darkness and hath no light?
let him trust in the name of the lord and stay upon his God.
behold all ye that kindle a fire that compass yourselves
about with sparks walk in the light of your fire and in the
sparks that ye have kindled. this shall ye have of mine hand
ye shall lie down in sorrow.
hearken to me ye that follow after righteousness ye that
seek the lord look unto the rock whence ye are hewn and to
the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.
look unto Abraham your father and unto Sarah that bare you
for I called him alone and blessed him and increased him.
for the lord shall comfort Zion he will comfort all her waste
places and he will make her wilderness like Eden and her
desert like the garden of the lord joy and gladness shall be
found therein thanksgiving and the voice of melody.
hearken unto me my people and give ear unto me O my nation
for a law shall proceed from me and I will make my judgment
to rest for a light of the people.
my righteousness is near my salvation is gone forth and mine
arms shall judge the people the isles shall wait upon me and
on mine arm shall they trust.
lift up your eyes to the heavens and look upon the earth
beneath for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke and the
earth shall wax old like a garment and they that dwell
therein shall die in like manner but my salvation shall be
for ever and my righteousness shall not be abolished.
hearken unto me ye that know righteousness the people in
whose heart is my law fear ye not the reproach of men
Neither be ye afraid of their revilings.
for the moth shall eat them up like a garment and the worm
shall eat them like wool but my righteousness shall be for
ever and my salvation from generation to generation.
awake awake put on strength O arm of the lord awake as in
the ancient days in the generations of old. art thou not it
that hath cut Rahab and wounded the dragon?
art thou not it which hath dried the sea the waters of the
great deep that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the
ransomed to pass over?
therefore the redeemed of the lord shall return and come with
singing unto Zion and everlasting joy shall be upon their
head they shall obtain gladness and joy and sorrow and
mourning shall flee away.
I even I Am he that comforteth you who art thou that thou
shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die and of the son of
man which shall be made as grass
and forgettest the lord thy maker that hath stretched forth
the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth and hast
feared continually every day because of the fury of the
oppressor as if he were ready to destroy? and where is the
fury of the oppressor?
the captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed and that he
should not die in the pit nor that his bread should fail.
but I Am the lord thy God that divided the sea whose waves
roared the lord of hosts is his name.
and I have put my words in thy mouth and I have covered thee
in the shadow of mine hand that I may plant the heavens and
lay the foundations of the earth and say unto Zion thou art
my people.
awake awake stand up O Jerusalem which hast drunk at the
hand of the lord the cup of his fury thou hast drunken the
dregs of the cup of trembling and wrung them out.
there is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath
brought forth Neither is there any that taketh her by the
hand of all the sons that she hath brought up.
these two things are come unto thee who shall be sorry for
thee? desolation and destruction and the famine and the
sword by whom shall I comfort thee?
thy sons have fainted they lie at the head of all the
streets as a wild bull in a net they are full of the fury of
the lord the rebuke of thy God.
therefore hear now this thou afflicted and drunken but not
with wine
thus saith thy lord the lord and thy God that pleadeth the
cause of his people behold I have taken out of thine hand
the cup of trembling even the dregs of the cup of my fury
thou shalt no more drink it again
but I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee
which have said to thy soul bow down that we may go over
and thou hast laid thy body as the ground and as the street
to them that went over.
awake awake put on thy strength O Zion put on thy
beautiful garments O Jerusalem the holy city for henceforth
there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the
unclean.
shake thyself from the dust Arise and sit down O Jerusalem
loose thyself from the Bands of thy neck O captive daughter
of Zion.
for thus saith the lord ye have sold yourselves for nought
and ye shall be redeemed without money.
for thus saith the lord God my people went down aforetime
into Egypt to Sojourn there and the Assyrian oppressed them
without cause.
now therefore what have I here saith the lord that my
people is taken away for nought? they that rule over them make
them to howl saith the lord and my name continually every
day is blasphemed.
therefore my people shall know my name therefore they shall
know in that day that I Am he that doth speak behold it is
I.
how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
bringeth good tidings that publisheth peace that bringeth
good tidings of good that publisheth salvation that saith
unto Zion thy God reigneth
thy watchmen shall lift up the voice with the voice together
shall they sing for they shall see eye to eye when the lord
shall bring again Zion.
break forth into joy sing together ye waste places of
Jerusalem for the lord hath comforted his people he hath
redeemed Jerusalem.
the lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the
nations and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation
of our God.
depart ye depart ye go ye out from thence touch no unclean
thing go ye out of the midst of her be ye clean that bear
the vessels of the lord.
for ye shall not go out with haste nor go by flight for the
lord will go before you and the God of Israel will be your
rereward.
behold my servant shall deal prudently he shall be exalted
and extolled and be very high.
as many were astonied at thee his visage was so marred more
than any man and his form more than the sons of men
so shall he sprinkle many nations the kings shall shut their
mouths at him for that which had not been told them shall
they see and that which they had not heard shall they
consider.
who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the
lord revealed?
for he shall grow up before him as a tender plant and as a
root out of a dry ground he hath no form nor comeliness and
when we shall see him there is no beauty that we should
desire him.
he is despised and rejected of men a man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief and we hid as it were our faces from
him he was despised and we esteemed him not.
surely he hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows yet
we did esteem him stricken smitten of God and afflicted.
but he was wounded for our transgressions he was bruised for
our iniquities the chastisement of our peace was upon him
and with his stripes we are healed.
all we like sheep have gone astray we have turned every one
to his own way and the lord hath laid on him the iniquity of
us all.
he was oppressed and he was afflicted yet he opened not his
mouth he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter and as a
sheep before her shearers is dumb so he openeth not his
mouth.
he was taken from prison and from judgment and who shall
declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of
the living for the transgression of my people was he
stricken.
and he made his grave with the wicked and with the rich in
his death because he had done no violence Neither was any
deceit in his mouth.
yet it pleased the lord to bruise him he hath put him to
grief when thou shalt make his soul an offering for Sin he
shall see his seed he shall prolong his days and the
pleasure of the lord shall prosper in his hand.
he shall see of the travail of his soul and shall be
satisfied by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many for he shall bear their iniquities.
therefore will I divide him a portion with the great and he
shall divide the spoil with the strong because he hath poured
out his soul unto death and he was numbered with the
transgressors and he bare the Sin of many and made
intercession for the transgressors.
sing O barren thou that didst not bear break forth into
singing and cry aloud thou that didst not travail with
child for more are the children of the desolate than the
children of the married wife saith the lord.
enlarge the place of thy tent and let them stretch forth the
curtains of thine habitations spare not lengthen thy cords
and strengthen thy stakes
for thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left
and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles and make the desolate
cities to be inhabited.
fear not for thou shalt not be ashamed Neither be thou
confounded for thou shalt not be put to shame for thou shalt
forget the shame of thy youth and shalt not remember the
reproach of thy widowhood any more.
for thy maker is thine husband the lord of hosts is his name
and thy redeemer the holy one of Israel the God of the whole
earth shall he be called.
for the lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved
in spirit and a wife of youth when thou wast refused saith
thy God.
for a small moment have I forsaken thee but with great
mercies will I gather thee.
in a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment but
with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee saith the
lord thy redeemer.
for this is as the waters of Noah unto me for as I have sworn
that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth so
have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee nor rebuke
thee.
for the mountains shall depart and the hills be removed but
my kindness shall not depart from thee Neither shall the
covenant of my peace be removed saith the lord that hath
mercy on thee.
O thou afflicted tossed with tempest and not comforted
behold I will lay thy stones with fair colours and lay thy
foundations with sapphires.
and I will make thy windows of agates and thy gates of
carbuncles and all thy borders of pleasant stones.
and all thy children shall be taught of the lord and great
shall be the peace of thy children.
in righteousness shalt thou be established thou shalt be far
from oppression for thou shalt not fear and from terror for
it shall not come near thee.
behold they shall surely gather together but not by me
whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for
thy sake.
behold I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the
fire and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work and
I have created the waster to destroy.
no weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper and every
tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt
condemn. this is the heritage of the servants of the lord and
their righteousness is of me saith the lord.
ho every one that thirsteth come ye to the waters and he
that hath no money come ye buy and eat yea come buy wine
and milk without money and without price.
wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and
your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently
unto me and eat ye that which is good and let your soul
delight itself in fatness.
incline your ear and come unto me hear and your soul shall
live and I will make an everlasting covenant with you even
the sure mercies of David.
behold I have given him for a witness to the people a leader
and commander to the people.
behold thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not and
nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the
lord thy God and for the holy one of Israel for he hath
glorified thee.
seek ye the lord while he may be found call ye upon him while
he is near
let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his
thoughts and let him return unto the lord and he will have
mercy upon him and to our God for he will abundantly pardon.
for my thoughts are not your thoughts Neither are your ways
my ways saith the lord.
for as the heavens are higher than the earth so are my ways
higher than your ways and my thoughts than your thoughts.
for as the rain cometh down and the snow from heaven and
returneth not thither but watereth the earth and maketh it
bring forth and bud that it may give seed to the sower and
bread to the eater
so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth it shall
not return unto me void but it shall accomplish that which I
please and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.
for ye shall go out with joy and be led forth with peace the
mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into
singing and all the trees of the field shall clap their
hands.
instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree and instead
of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree and it shall be to
the lord for a name for an everlasting sign that shall not be
cut off.
thus saith the lord keep ye judgment and do justice for my
salvation is near to come and my righteousness to be
revealed.
blessed is the man that doeth this and the son of man that
layeth hold on it that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it
and keepeth his hand from doing any evil.
Neither let the son of the stranger that hath joined himself
to the lord speak saying the lord hath utterly separated me
from his people Neither let the eunuch say behold I Am a
dry tree.
for thus saith the lord unto the eunuchs that keep my
sabbaths and choose the things that please me and take hold
of my covenant
even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a
place and a name better than of sons and of daughters I will
give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut off.
also the sons of the stranger that join themselves to the
lord to serve him and to love the name of the lord to be
his servants every one that keepeth the sabbath from
polluting it and taketh hold of my covenant
even them will I bring to my holy mountain and make them
joyful in my house of prayer their burnt offerings and their
sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar for mine house
shall be called an house of prayer for all people.
the lord God which gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith
yet will I gather others to him beside those that are
gathered unto him.
all ye beasts of the field come to devour yea all ye beasts
in the forest.
his watchmen are blind they are all ignorant they are all
dumb dogs they cannot bark sleeping lying down loving to
slumber.
yea they are greedy dogs which can never have enough and
they are shepherds that cannot understand they all look to
their own way every one for his gain from his quarter.
come ye say they I will fetch wine and we will fill
ourselves with strong drink and to morrow shall be as this
day and Much more abundant.
the righteous perisheth and no man layeth it to heart and
merciful men are taken away none considering that the
righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
he shall enter into peace they shall rest in their beds each
one walking in his uprightness.
but draw near hither ye sons of the sorceress the seed of
the adulterer and the whore.
against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a
wide mouth and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of
transgression a seed of falsehood.
Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree
slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the
rocks?
among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion they
they are thy Lot even to them hast thou poured a drink
offering thou hast offered a meat offering. should I receive
comfort in these?
upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed even
thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice.
behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy
remembrance for thou hast discovered thyself to another than
me and art gone up thou hast enlarged thy bed and made thee
a covenant with them thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest
it.
and thou wentest to the king with ointment and didst increase
thy perfumes and didst send thy messengers far off and didst
debase thyself even unto hell.
thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way yet saidst thou
not there is no hope thou hast found the life of thine hand
therefore thou wast not grieved.
and of whom hast thou been afraid or feared that thou hast
lied and hast not remembered me nor laid it to thy heart?
have not I held my peace even of old and thou fearest me not?
I will declare thy righteousness and thy works for they
shall not profit thee.
when thou criest let thy companies deliver thee but the wind
shall carry them all away vanity shall take them but he that
putteth his trust in me shall possess the land and shall
inherit my holy mountain
and shall say cast ye up cast ye up prepare the way take
up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people.
for thus saith the high and lofty one that inhabiteth
eternity whose name is holy I dwell in the high and holy
place with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit
to revive the spirit of the humble and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones.
for I will not contend for ever Neither will I be always
wroth for the spirit should fail before me and the souls
which I have made.
for the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth and smote
him I hid me and was wroth and he went on frowardly in the
way of his heart.
I have seen his ways and will heal him I will lead him also
and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners.
I create the fruit of the lips peace peace to him that is
far off and to him that is near saith the lord and I will
heal him.
but the wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest
whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
there is no peace saith my God to the wicked.
cry aloud spare not lift up thy voice like a trumpet and
shew my people their transgression and the house of Jacob
their sins.
yet they seek me daily and delight to know my ways as a
nation that did righteousness and forsook not the ordinance
of their God they ask of me the ordinances of justice they
take delight in approaching to God.
wherefore have we fasted say they and thou seest not?
wherefore have we afflicted our soul and thou takest no
knowledge? behold in the day of your fast ye find pleasure
and exact all your labours.
behold ye fast for strife and debate and to smite with the
fist of wickedness ye shall not fast as ye do this day to
make your voice to be heard on high.
is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to
afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush and
to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a
fast and an acceptable day to the lord?
is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the Bands of
wickedness to undo the heavy burdens and to let the
oppressed go free and that ye break every yoke?
is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry and that thou bring
the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the
naked that thou cover him and that thou hide not thyself
from thine own flesh?
then shall thy light break forth as the morning and thine
health shall spring forth speedily and thy righteousness
shall go before thee the glory of the lord shall be thy
rereward.
then shalt thou call and the lord shall answer thou shalt
cry and he shall say here I Am. if thou take away from the
midst of thee the yoke the putting forth of the finger and
speaking vanity
and if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry and satisfy the
afflicted soul then shall thy light rise in obscurity and
thy darkness be as the noon day
and the lord shall guide thee continually and satisfy thy
soul in drought and make fat thy bones and thou shalt be
like a watered garden and like a spring of water whose
waters fail not.
and they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste
places thou shalt raise up the foundations of many
generations and thou shalt be called the repairer of the
breach the restorer of paths to dwell in.
if thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day and call the sabbath a delight the
holy of the lord honourable and shalt honour him not doing
thine own ways nor finding thine own pleasure nor speaking
thine own words
then shalt thou delight thyself in the lord and I will cause
thee to ride upon the high places of the earth and feed thee
with the heritage of Jacob thy father for the mouth of the
lord hath spoken it.
behold the lord s hand is not shortened that it cannot save
Neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear
but your iniquities have separated between you and your God
and your sins have hid his face from you that he will not
hear.
for your hands are defiled with blood and your fingers with
iniquity your lips have spoken lies your tongue hath
muttered perverseness.
none calleth for justice nor any pleadeth for truth they
trust in vanity and speak lies they conceive mischief and
bring forth iniquity.
they hatch cockatrice eggs and weave the spider s web he
that eateth of their eggs dieth and that which is crushed
breaketh out into a viper.
their webs shall not become garments Neither shall they cover
themselves with their works their works are works of
iniquity and the act of violence is in their hands.
their feet run to evil and they make haste to shed innocent
blood their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity wasting and
destruction are in their paths.
the way of peace they know not and there is no judgment in
their goings they have made them crooked paths whosoever
goeth therein shall not know peace.
therefore is judgment far from us Neither doth justice
overtake us we wait for light but behold obscurity for
brightness but we walk in darkness.
we grope for the wall like the blind and we grope as if we
had no eyes we stumble at noon day as in the night we are in
desolate places as dead men.
we roar all like bears and mourn sore like doves we look for
judgment but there is none for salvation but it is far off
from us.
for our transgressions are multiplied before thee and our
sins testify against us for our transgressions are with us
and as for our iniquities we know them
in transgressing and lying against the lord and departing
away from our God speaking oppression and revolt conceiving
and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.
and judgment is turned away backward and justice standeth
afar off for truth is fallen in the street and equity cannot
enter.
yea truth faileth and he that departeth from evil maketh
himself a prey and the lord saw it and it displeased him
that there was no judgment.
and he saw that there was no man and wondered that there was
no intercessor therefore his arm brought salvation unto him
and his righteousness it sustained him.
for he put on righteousness as a breastplate and an helmet of
salvation upon his head and he put on the garments of
vengeance for clothing and was clad with zeal as a cloak.
according to their deeds accordingly he will repay fury to
his adversaries recompence to his enemies to the islands he
will repay recompence.
so shall they fear the name of the lord from the west and his
glory from the rising of the sun. when the enemy shall come in
like a flood the spirit of the lord shall lift up a standard
against him.
and the redeemer shall come to Zion and unto them that turn
from transgression in Jacob saith the lord.
as for me this is my covenant with them saith the lord my
spirit that is upon thee and my words which I have put in thy
mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth nor out of the mouth
of thy seed nor out of the mouth of thy seed s seed saith
the lord from henceforth and for ever.
Arise shine for thy light is come and the glory of the lord
is risen upon thee.
for behold the darkness shall cover the earth and gross
darkness the people but the lord shall Arise upon thee and
his glory shall be seen upon thee.
and the Gentiles shall come to thy light and kings to the
brightness of thy rising.
lift up thine eyes round about and see all they gather
themselves together they come to thee thy sons shall come
from far and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side.
then thou shalt see and flow together and thine heart shall
fear and be enlarged because the abundance of the sea shall
be converted unto thee the forces of the Gentiles shall come
unto thee.
the multitude of camels shall cover thee the dromedaries of
Midian and Ephah all they from Sheba shall come they shall
bring gold and incense and they shall shew forth the praises
of the lord.
all the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee
the rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee they shall come
up with acceptance on mine altar and I will glorify the house
of my glory.
who are these that fly as a cloud and as the doves to their
windows?
surely the isles shall wait for me and the ships of Tarshish
first to bring thy sons from far their Silver and their gold
with them unto the name of the lord thy God and to the holy
one of Israel because he hath glorified thee.
and the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls and their
kings shall minister unto thee for in my wrath I smote thee
but in my favour have I had mercy on thee.
therefore thy gates shall be open continually they shall not
be shut day nor night that men may bring unto thee the forces
of the Gentiles and that their kings may be brought.
for the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall
perish yea those nations shall be utterly wasted.
the glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee the fir tree the
pine tree and the box together to beautify the place of my
sanctuary and I will make the place of my feet glorious.
the sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending
unto thee and all they that despised thee shall bow
themselves down at the soles of thy feet and they shall call
thee the city of the lord the Zion of the holy one of
Israel.
whereas thou has been forsaken and hated so that no man went
through thee I will make thee an eternal excellency a joy of
many generations.
thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles and shalt suck
the breast of kings and thou shalt know that I the lord Am
thy saviour and thy redeemer the Mighty one of Jacob.
for brass I will bring gold and for Iron I will bring Silver
and for wood brass and for stones Iron I will also make thy
officers peace and thine exactors righteousness.
violence shall no more be heard in thy land wasting nor
destruction within thy borders but thou shalt call thy walls
salvation and thy gates praise.
the sun shall be no more thy light by day Neither for
brightness shall the moon give light unto thee but the lord
shall be unto thee an everlasting light and thy God thy
glory.
thy sun shall no more go down Neither shall thy moon withdraw
itself for the lord shall be thine everlasting light and the
days of thy mourning shall be ended.
thy people also shall be all righteous they shall inherit the
land for ever the branch of my planting the work of my
hands that I may be glorified.
a little one shall become a thousand and a small one a strong
nation I the lord will hasten it in his time.
the spirit of the lord God is upon me because the lord hath
anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek he hath sent
me to bind up the brokenhearted to proclaim liberty to the
captives and the opening of the prison to them that are
bound
to proclaim the acceptable year of the lord and the day of
vengeance of our God to comfort all that mourn
to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion to give unto them
beauty for ashes the oil of joy for mourning the garment of
praise for the spirit of heaviness that they might be called
trees of righteousness the planting of the lord that he
might be glorified.
and they shall build the old wastes they shall raise up the
former desolations and they shall repair the waste cities
the desolations of many generations.
and strangers shall stand and feed your flocks and the sons
of the alien shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.
but ye shall be named the priests of the lord men shall call
you the ministers of our God ye shall eat the Riches of the
Gentiles and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves.
for your shame ye shall have double and for confusion they
shall rejoice in their portion therefore in their land they
shall possess the double everlasting joy shall be unto them.
for I the lord love judgment I hate robbery for burnt
offering and I will direct their work in truth and I will
make an everlasting covenant with them.
and their seed shall be known among the Gentiles and their
offspring among the people all that see them shall
acknowledge them that they are the seed which the lord hath
blessed.
I will greatly rejoice in the lord my soul shall be joyful in
my God for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation
he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness as a
bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments and as a bride
adorneth herself with her jewels.
for as the earth bringeth forth her bud and as the garden
causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth so the
lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth
before all the nations.
for Zion s sake will I not hold my peace and for Jerusalem s
sake I will not rest until the righteousness thereof go forth
as brightness and the salvation thereof as a lamp that
burneth.
and the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness and all kings
thy glory and thou shalt be called by a new name which the
mouth of the lord shall name.
thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the lord
and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.
thou shalt no more be termed forsaken Neither shall thy land
any more be termed desolate but thou shalt be called
Hephzibah and thy land Beulah for the lord delighteth in
thee and thy land shall be married.
for as a young man marrieth a virgin so shall thy sons marry
thee and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride so shall
thy God rejoice over thee.
I have set watchmen upon thy walls O Jerusalem which shall
never hold their peace day nor night ye that make mention of
the lord keep not silence
and give him no rest till he establish and till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
the lord hath sworn by his right hand and by the arm of his
strength surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for
thine enemies and the sons of the stranger shall not drink
thy wine for the which thou hast laboured
but they that have gathered it shall eat it and praise the
lord and they that have brought it together shall drink it in
the courts of my holiness.
go through go through the gates prepare ye the way of the
people cast up cast up the highway gather out the stones
lift up a standard for the people.
behold the lord hath proclaimed unto the end of the world
say ye to the daughter of Zion behold thy salvation cometh
behold his reward is with him and his work before him.
and they shall call them the holy people the redeemed of the
lord and thou shalt be called sought out a city not
forsaken.
who is this that cometh from Edom with dyed garments from
Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel travelling in
the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness
Mighty to save.
wherefore art thou red in thine apparel and thy garments like
him that treadeth in the winefat?
I have trodden the winepress alone and of the people there
was none with me for I will tread them in mine anger and
trample them in my fury and their blood shall be sprinkled
upon my garments and I will stain all my raiment.
for the day of vengeance is in mine heart and the year of my
redeemed is come.
and I looked and there was none to help and I wondered that
there was none to uphold therefore mine own arm brought
salvation unto me and my fury it upheld me.
and I will tread down the people in mine anger and make them
drunk in my fury and I will bring down their strength to the
earth.
I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the lord and the
praises of the lord according to all that the lord hath
bestowed on us and the great goodness toward the house of
Israel which he hath bestowed on them according to his
mercies and according to the multitude of his
lovingkindnesses.
for he said surely they are my people children that will not
lie so he was their saviour.
in all their affliction he was afflicted and the angel of his
presence saved them in his love and in his pity he redeemed
them and he bare them and carried them all the days of old.
but they rebelled and vexed his holy spirit therefore he was
turned to be their enemy and he fought against them.
then he remembered the days of old Moses and his people
saying where is he that brought them up out of the sea with
the Shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy
spirit within him?
that led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious
arm dividing the water before them to make himself an
everlasting name?
that led them through the deep as an horse in the wilderness
that they should not stumble?
as a beast goeth down into the valley the spirit of the lord
caused him to rest so didst thou lead thy people to make
thyself a glorious name.
look down from heaven and behold from the habitation of thy
holiness and of thy glory where is thy zeal and thy strength
the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are
they restrained?
doubtless thou art our father though Abraham be ignorant of
us and Israel acknowledge us not thou O lord art our
father our redeemer thy name is from everlasting.
O lord why hast thou made us to err from thy ways and
hardened our heart from thy fear? return for thy servants
sake the tribes of thine inheritance.
the people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little
while our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.
we are thine thou never barest rule over them they were not
called by thy name.
oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens that thou wouldest
come down that the mountains might flow down at thy presence
as when the melting fire burneth the fire causeth the waters
to boil to make thy name known to thine adversaries that the
nations may tremble at thy presence
when thou didst terrible things which we looked not for thou
camest down the mountains flowed down at thy presence.
for since the beginning of the world men have not heard nor
perceived by the ear Neither hath the eye seen O God beside
thee what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him.
thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness
those that remember thee in thy ways behold thou art wroth
for we have sinned in those is continuance and we shall be
saved.
but we are all as an unclean thing and all our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags and we all do fade as a
leaf and our iniquities like the wind have taken us away.
and there is none that calleth upon thy name that stirreth up
himself to take hold of thee for thou hast hid thy face from
us and hast consumed us because of our iniquities.
but now O lord thou art our father we are the clay and
thou our potter and we all are the work of thy hand.
be not wroth very sore O lord Neither remember iniquity for
ever behold see we beseech thee we are all thy people.
thy holy cities are a wilderness Zion is a wilderness
Jerusalem a desolation.
our holy and our beautiful house where our fathers praised
thee is burned up with fire and all our pleasant things are
laid waste.
wilt thou refrain thyself for these things O lord? wilt thou
hold thy peace and afflict us very sore?
I Am sought of them that asked not for me I Am found of them
that sought me not I said behold me behold me unto a
nation that was not called by my name.
I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious
people which walketh in a way that was not good after their
own thoughts
a people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face
that sacrificeth in gardens and burneth incense upon altars
of brick
which remain among the graves and lodge in the monuments
which eat swine s flesh and broth of abominable things is in
their vessels
which say stand by thyself come not near to me for I Am
holier than thou. these are a smoke in my nose a fire that
burneth all the day.
behold it is written before me I will not keep silence but
will recompense even recompense into their bosom
your iniquities and the iniquities of your fathers together
saith the lord which have burned incense upon the mountains
and blasphemed me upon the hills therefore will I measure
their former work into their bosom.
thus saith the lord as the new wine is found in the cluster
and one saith destroy it not for a blessing is in it so
will I do for my servants sakes that I may not destroy them
all.
and I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob and out of Judah
an inheritor of my mountains and mine elect shall inherit it
and my servants shall dwell there.
and Sharon shall be a fold of flocks and the valley of Achor
a place for the herds to lie down in for my people that have
sought me.
but ye are they that forsake the lord that forget my holy
mountain that prepare a table for that troop and that
furnish the drink offering unto that number.
therefore will I number you to the sword and ye shall all bow
down to the slaughter because when I called ye did not
answer when I spake ye did not hear but did evil before
mine eyes and did choose that wherein I delighted not.
therefore thus saith the lord God behold my servants shall
eat but ye shall be hungry behold my servants shall drink
but ye shall be thirsty behold my servants shall rejoice
but ye shall be ashamed
behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart but ye shall
cry for sorrow of heart and shall howl for vexation of
spirit.
and ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen for
the lord God shall slay thee and call his servants by another
name
that he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself
in the God of truth and he that sweareth in the earth shall
swear by the God of truth because the former troubles are
forgotten and because they are hid from mine eyes.
for behold I create new heavens and a new earth and the
former shall not be remembered nor come into mind.
but be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create
for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing and her people a
joy.
and I will rejoice in Jerusalem and joy in my people and the
voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her nor the voice
of crying.
there shall be no more thence an infant of days nor an old
man that hath not filled his days for the child shall die an
hundred years old but the sinner being an hundred years old
shall be accursed.
and they shall build houses and inhabit them and they shall
plant vineyards and eat the fruit of them.
they shall not build and another inhabit they shall not
plant and another eat for as the days of a tree are the days
of my people and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of
their hands.
they shall not labour in vain nor bring forth for trouble
for they are the seed of the blessed of the lord and their
offspring with them.
and it shall come to pass that before they call I will
answer and while they are yet speaking I will hear.
the wolf and the lamb shall feed together and the lion shall
eat straw like the bullock and dust shall be the serpent s
meat. they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain
saith the lord.
thus saith the lord the heaven is my throne and the earth is
my footstool where is the house that ye build unto me? and
where is the place of my rest?
for all those things hath mine hand made and all those things
have been saith the lord but to this man will I look even
to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit and trembleth at
my word.
he that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man he that
sacrificeth a lamb as if he cut off a dog s neck he that
offereth an oblation as if he offered swine s blood he that
burneth incense as if he blessed an idol. yea they have
chosen their own ways and their soul delighteth in their
abominations.
I also will choose their delusions and will bring their fears
upon them because when I called none did answer when I
spake they did not hear but they did evil before mine eyes
and chose that in which I delighted not.
hear the word of the lord ye that tremble at his word your
brethren that hated you that cast you out for my name s sake
said let the lord be glorified but he shall appear to your
joy and they shall be ashamed.
a voice of noise from the city a voice from the temple a
voice of the lord that rendereth recompence to his enemies.
before she travailed she brought forth before her pain came
she was delivered of a man child.
who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? shall
the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation
be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed she brought
forth her children.
shall I bring to the birth and not cause to bring forth?
saith the lord shall I cause to bring forth and shut the
womb? saith thy God.
rejoice ye with Jerusalem and be glad with her all ye that
love her rejoice for joy with her all ye that mourn for her
that ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolations that ye may milk out and be delighted with the
abundance of her glory.
for thus saith the lord behold I will extend peace to her
like a river and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing
stream then shall ye suck ye shall be borne upon her sides
and be dandled upon her knees.
as one whom his mother comforteth so will I comfort you and
ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.
and when ye see this your heart shall rejoice and your bones
shall flourish like an herb and the hand of the lord shall be
known toward his servants and his indignation toward his
enemies.
for behold the lord will come with fire and with his
chariots like a whirlwind to render his anger with fury and
his rebuke with flames of fire.
for by fire and by his sword will the lord plead with all
flesh and the slain of the lord shall be many.
they that sanctify themselves and purify themselves in the
gardens behind one tree in the midst eating swine s flesh
and the abomination and the mouse shall be consumed
together saith the lord.
for I know their works and their thoughts it shall come that
I will gather all nations and tongues and they shall come
and see my glory.
and I will set a sign among them and I will send those that
escape of them unto the nations to Tarshish Pul and Lud
that draw the bow to Tubal and Javan to the isles afar off
that have not heard my fame Neither have seen my glory and
they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.
and they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto
the lord out of all nations upon horses and in chariots and
in litters and upon mules and upon swift beasts to my holy
mountain Jerusalem saith the lord as the children of Israel
bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the
lord.
and I will also take of them for priests and for Levites
saith the lord.
for as the new heavens and the new earth which I will make
shall remain before me saith the lord so shall your seed and
your name remain.
and it shall come to pass that from one new moon to another
and from one sabbath to another shall all flesh come to
worship before me saith the lord.
and they shall go forth and look upon the carcases of the men
that have transgressed against me for their worm shall not
die Neither shall their fire be quenched and they shall be
an abhorring unto all flesh.
the words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah of the priests that
were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin
to whom the word of the lord came in the days of Josiah the
son of Amon king of Judah in the thirteenth year of his
reign.
it came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king
of Judah unto the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah the
son of Josiah king of Judah unto the carrying away of
Jerusalem captive in the fifth month.
then the word of the lord came unto me saying
before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee and before thou
camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee and I ordained
thee a prophet unto the nations.
then said I ah lord God behold I cannot speak for I Am a
child.
but the lord said unto me say not I Am a child for thou
shalt go to all that I shall send thee and whatsoever I
command thee thou shalt speak.
be not afraid of their faces for I Am with thee to deliver
thee saith the lord.
then the lord put forth his hand and touched my mouth. and
the lord said unto me behold I have put my words in thy
mouth.
see I have this day set thee over the nations and over the
kingdoms to root out and to pull down and to destroy and
to throw down to build and to plant.
moreover the word of the lord came unto me saying Jeremiah
what seest thou? and I said I see a rod of an almond tree.
then said the lord unto me thou hast well seen for I will
hasten my word to perform it.
and the word of the lord came unto me the second time saying
what seest thou? and I said I see a seething pot and the
face thereof is toward the north.
then the lord said unto me out of the north an evil shall
break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.
for lo I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the
north saith the lord and they shall come and they shall set
every one his throne at the entering of the gates of
Jerusalem and against all the walls thereof round about and
against all the cities of Judah.
and I will utter my judgments against them touching all their
wickedness who have forsaken me and have burned incense unto
other gods and worshipped the works of their own hands.
thou therefore gird up thy loins and Arise and speak unto
them all that I command thee be not dismayed at their faces
lest I confound thee before them.
for behold I have made thee this day a defenced city and an
Iron pillar and brasen walls against the whole land against
the kings of Judah against the princes thereof against the
priests thereof and against the people of the land.
and they shall fight against thee but they shall not prevail
against thee for I Am with thee saith the lord to deliver
thee.
moreover the word of the lord came to me saying
go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem saying thus saith the
lord I remember thee the kindness of thy youth the love of
thine espousals when thou wentest after me in the wilderness
in a land that was not sown.
Israel was holiness unto the lord and the firstfruits of his
increase all that devour him shall offend evil shall come
upon them saith the lord.
hear ye the word of the lord O house of Jacob and all the
families of the house of Israel
thus saith the lord what iniquity have your fathers found in
me that they are gone far from me and have walked after
vanity and are become vain?
Neither said they where is the lord that brought us up out of
the land of Egypt that led us through the wilderness through
a land of deserts and of pits through a land of drought and
of the shadow of death through a land that no man passed
through and where no man dwelt?
and I brought you into a plentiful country to eat the fruit
thereof and the goodness thereof but when ye entered ye
defiled my land and made mine heritage an abomination.
the priests said not where is the lord? and they that handle
the law knew me not the pastors also transgressed against me
and the prophets prophesied by Baal and walked after things
that do not profit.
wherefore I will yet plead with you saith the lord and with
your children s children will I plead.
for pass over the isles of Chittim and see and send unto
Kedar and consider diligently and see if there be such a
thing.
hath a nation changed their gods which are yet no gods? but
my people have changed their glory for that which doth not
profit.
be astonished O ye heavens at this and be horribly afraid
be ye very desolate saith the lord.
for my people have committed two evils they have forsaken me
the fountain of living waters and hewed them out cisterns
broken cisterns that can hold no water.
is Israel a servant? is he a homeborn slave? why is he
spoiled?
the young lions roared upon him and yelled and they made his
land waste his cities are burned without inhabitant.
also the children of Noph and Tahapanes have broken the crown
of thy head.
hast thou not procured this unto thyself in that thou hast
forsaken the lord thy God when he led thee by the way?
and now what hast thou to do in the way of Egypt to drink the
waters of Sihor? or what hast thou to do in the way of
Assyria to drink the waters of the river?
thine own wickedness shall correct thee and thy backslidings
shall reprove thee know therefore and see that it is an evil
thing and bitter that thou hast forsaken the lord thy God
and that my fear is not in thee saith the lord God of hosts.
for of old time I have broken thy yoke and burst thy Bands
and thou saidst I will not transgress when upon every high
hill and under every green tree thou wanderest playing the
harlot.
yet I had planted thee a noble vine wholly a right seed how
then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange
vine unto me?
for though thou wash thee with nitre and take thee Much soap
yet thine iniquity is marked before me saith the lord God.
how canst thou say I Am not polluted I have not gone after
Baalim? see thy way in the valley know what thou hast done
thou art a swift dromedary traversing her ways
a wild ass used to the wilderness that snuffeth up the wind
at her pleasure in her occasion who can turn her away? all
they that seek her will not weary themselves in her month
they shall find her.
withhold thy foot from being unshod and thy throat from
thirst but thou saidst there is no hope no for I have
loved strangers and after them will I go.
as the thief is ashamed when he is found so is the house of
Israel ashamed they their kings their princes and their
priests and their prophets.
saying to a stock thou art my father and to a stone thou
hast brought me forth for they have turned their back unto
me and not their face but in the time of their trouble they
will say Arise and save us.
but where are thy gods that thou hast made thee? let them
Arise if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble for
according to the number of thy cities are thy gods O Judah.
wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have transgressed
against me saith the lord.
in vain have I smitten your children they received no
correction your own sword hath devoured your prophets like a
destroying lion.
O generation see ye the word of the lord. have I been a
wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? wherefore say my
people we are lords we will come no more unto thee?
can a maid forget her ornaments or a bride her attire? yet my
people have forgotten me days without number.
why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? therefore hast thou
also taught the wicked ones thy ways.
also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor
innocents I have not found it by secret search but upon all
these.
yet thou sayest because I Am innocent surely his anger shall
turn from me. behold I will plead with thee because thou
sayest I have not sinned.
why gaddest thou about so Much to change thy way? thou also
shalt be ashamed of Egypt as thou wast ashamed of Assyria.
yea thou shalt go forth from him and thine hands upon thine
head for the lord hath rejected thy confidences and thou
shalt not prosper in them.
they say if a man put away his wife and she go from him and
become another man s shall he return unto her again? shall
not that land be greatly polluted? but thou hast played the
harlot with many lovers yet return again to me saith the
lord.
lift up thine eyes unto the high places and see where thou
hast not been lien with. in the ways hast thou sat for them
as the Arabian in the wilderness and thou hast polluted the
land with thy whoredoms and with thy wickedness.
therefore the showers have been withholden and there hath
been no latter rain and thou hadst a whore s forehead thou
refusedst to be ashamed.
wilt thou not from this time cry unto me my father thou art
the guide of my youth?
will he reserve his anger for ever? will he keep it to the
end? behold thou hast spoken and done evil things as thou
couldest.
the lord said also unto me in the days of Josiah the king
hast thou seen that which backsliding Israel hath done? she is
gone up upon every high mountain and under every green tree
and there hath played the harlot.
and I said after she had done all these things turn thou unto
me. but she returned not. and her treacherous sister Judah saw
it.
and I saw when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel
committed adultery I had put her away and given her a bill of
divorce yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not but went
and played the harlot also.
and it came to pass through the lightness of her whoredom
that she defiled the land and committed adultery with stones
and with stocks.
and yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not
turned unto me with her whole heart but feignedly saith the
lord.
and the lord said unto me the backsliding Israel hath
justified herself more than treacherous Judah.
go and proclaim these words toward the north and say return
thou backsliding Israel saith the lord and I will not cause
mine anger to fall upon you for I Am merciful saith the
lord and I will not keep anger for ever.
only acknowledge thine iniquity that thou hast transgressed
against the lord thy God and hast scattered thy ways to the
strangers under every green tree and ye have not obeyed my
voice saith the lord.
turn O backsliding children saith the lord for I Am married
unto you and I will take you one of a city and two of a
family and I will bring you to Zion
and I will give you pastors according to mine heart which
shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.
and it shall come to pass when ye be multiplied and increased
in the land in those days saith the lord they shall say no
more the ark of the covenant of the lord Neither shall it
come to mind Neither shall they remember it Neither shall
they visit it Neither shall that be done any more.
at that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the lord
and all the nations shall be gathered unto it to the name of
the lord to Jerusalem Neither shall they walk any more after
the imagination of their evil heart.
in those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of
Israel and they shall come together out of the land of the
north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto
your fathers.
but I said how shall I put thee among the children and give
thee a pleasant land a goodly heritage of the hosts of
nations? and I said thou shalt call me my father and shalt
not turn away from me.
surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband so
have ye dealt treacherously with me O house of Israel saith
the lord.
a voice was heard upon the high places weeping and
supplications of the children of Israel for they have
perverted their way and they have forgotten the lord their
God.
return ye backsliding children and I will heal your
backslidings. behold we come unto thee for thou art the lord
our God.
truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills and from
the multitude of mountains truly in the lord our God is the
salvation of Israel.
for shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our
youth their flocks and their herds their sons and their
daughters.
we lie down in our shame and our confusion covereth us for
we have sinned against the lord our God we and our fathers
from our youth even unto this day and have not obeyed the
voice of the lord our God.
if thou wilt return O Israel saith the lord return unto me
and if thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight
then shalt thou not remove.
and thou shalt swear the lord liveth in truth in judgment
and in righteousness and the nations shall bless themselves
in him and in him shall they glory.
for thus saith the lord to the men of Judah and Jerusalem
break up your fallow ground and sow not among thorns.
circumcise yourselves to the lord and take away the foreskins
of your heart ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem
lest my fury come forth like fire and burn that none can
quench it because of the evil of your doings.
declare ye in Judah and publish in Jerusalem and say blow
ye the trumpet in the land cry gather together and say
assemble yourselves and let us go into the defenced cities.
set up the standard toward Zion retire stay not for I will
bring evil from the north and a great destruction.
the lion is come up from his thicket and the destroyer of the
Gentiles is on his way he is gone forth from his place to
make thy land desolate and thy cities shall be laid waste
without an inhabitant.
for this gird you with sackcloth lament and howl for the
fierce anger of the lord is not turned back from us.
and it shall come to pass at that day saith the lord that
the heart of the king shall perish and the heart of the
princes and the priests shall be astonished and the prophets
shall wonder.
then said I ah lord God surely thou hast greatly deceived
this people and Jerusalem saying ye shall have peace
whereas the sword reacheth unto the soul.
at that time shall it be said to this people and to Jerusalem
a dry wind of the high places in the wilderness toward the
daughter of my people not to fan nor to cleanse
even a full wind from those places shall come unto me now
also will I give sentence against them.
behold he shall come up as clouds and his chariots shall be
as a whirlwind his horses are swifter than eagles. woe unto
us for we are spoiled.
O Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness that thou
mayest be saved. how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within
thee?
for a voice declareth from Dan and publisheth affliction from
mount Ephraim.
make ye mention to the nations behold publish against
Jerusalem that watchers come from a far country and give out
their voice against the cities of Judah.
as keepers of a field are they against her round about
because she hath been rebellious against me saith the lord.
thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee
this is thy wickedness because it is bitter because it
reacheth unto thine heart.
my bowels my bowels I Am pained at my very heart my heart
maketh a noise in me I cannot hold my peace because thou
hast heard O my soul the sound of the trumpet the alarm of
war.
destruction upon destruction is cried for the whole land is
spoiled suddenly are my tents spoiled and my curtains in a
moment.
how long shall I see the standard and hear the sound of the
trumpet?
for my people is foolish they have not known me they are
sottish children and they have none understanding they are
wise to do evil but to do good they have no knowledge.
I beheld the earth and lo it was without form and void
and the heavens and they had no light.
I beheld the mountains and lo they trembled and all the
hills moved lightly.
I beheld and lo there was no man and all the birds of the
heavens were fled.
I beheld and lo the fruitful place was a wilderness and
all the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the
lord and by his fierce anger.
for thus hath the lord said the whole land shall be desolate
yet will I not make a full end.
for this shall the earth mourn and the heavens above be
black because I have spoken it I have purposed it and will
not repent Neither will I turn back from it.
the whole city shall flee for the noise of the horsemen and
bowmen they shall go into thickets and climb up upon the
rocks every city shall be forsaken and not a man dwell
therein.
and when thou art spoiled what wilt thou do? though thou
clothest thyself with crimson though thou deckest thee with
ornaments of gold though thou rentest thy face with painting
in vain shalt thou make thyself fair thy lovers will despise
thee they will seek thy life.
for I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail and the
anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child the
voice of the daughter of Zion that bewaileth herself that
spreadeth her hands saying woe is me now for my soul is
wearied because of murderers.
run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem and see
now and know and seek in the broad places thereof if ye can
find a man if there be any that executeth judgment that
seeketh the truth and I will pardon it.
and though they say the lord liveth surely they swear
falsely.
O lord are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou hast stricken
them but they have not grieved thou hast consumed them but
they have refused to receive correction they have made their
faces harder than a rock they have refused to return.
therefore I said surely these are poor they are foolish for
they know not the way of the lord nor the judgment of their
God.
I will get me unto the great men and will speak unto them
for they have known the way of the lord and the judgment of
their God but these have altogether broken the yoke and
burst the bonds.
wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay them and a wolf
of the evenings shall spoil them a leopard shall watch over
their cities every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in
pieces because their transgressions are many and their
backslidings are increased.
how shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken
me and sworn by them that are no gods when I had fed them to
the full they then committed adultery and assembled
themselves by troops in the harlots houses.
they were as fed horses in the morning every one neighed
after his neighbour s wife.
shall I not visit for these things? saith the lord and shall
not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
go ye up upon her walls and destroy but make not a full end
take away her battlements for they are not the lord s.
for the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very
treacherously against me saith the lord.
they have belied the lord and said it is not he Neither
shall evil come upon us Neither shall we see sword nor
famine
and the prophets shall become wind and the word is not in
them thus shall it be done unto them.
wherefore thus saith the lord God of hosts because ye speak
this word behold I will make my words in thy mouth fire and
this people wood and it shall devour them.
lo I will bring a nation upon you from far O house of
Israel saith the lord it is a Mighty nation it is an
ancient nation a nation whose language thou knowest not
Neither understandest what they say.
their quiver is as an open sepulchre they are all Mighty men.
and they shall eat up thine harvest and thy bread which thy
sons and thy daughters should eat they shall eat up thy
flocks and thine herds they shall eat up thy vines and thy
fig trees they shall impoverish thy fenced cities wherein
thou trustedst with the sword.
nevertheless in those days saith the lord I will not make a
full end with you.
and it shall come to pass when ye shall say wherefore doeth
the lord our God all these things unto us? then shalt thou
answer them like as ye have forsaken me and served strange
gods in your land so shall ye serve strangers in a land that
is not your s.
declare this in the house of Jacob and publish it in Judah
saying
hear now this O foolish people and without understanding
which have eyes and see not which have ears and hear not
fear ye not me? saith the lord will ye not tremble at my
presence which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea
by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass it and though the
waves thereof toss themselves yet can they not prevail
though they roar yet can they not pass over it?
but this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart they
are revolted and gone.
Neither say they in their heart let us now fear the lord our
God that giveth rain both the former and the latter in his
season he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the
harvest.
your iniquities have turned away these things and your sins
have withholden good things from you.
for among my people are found wicked men they lay wait as he
that setteth snares they set a trap they catch men.
as a cage is full of birds so are their houses full of
deceit therefore they are become great and waxen rich.
they are waxen fat they shine yea they overpass the deeds
of the wicked they judge not the cause the cause of the
fatherless yet they prosper and the right of the needy do
they not judge.
shall I not visit for these things? saith the lord shall not
my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
a wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land
the prophets prophesy falsely and the priests bear rule by
their means and my people love to have it so and what will
ye do in the end thereof?
O ye children of Benjamin gather yourselves to flee out of
the midst of Jerusalem and blow the trumpet in Tekoa and set
up a sign of fire in Bethhaccerem for evil appeareth out of
the north and great destruction.
I have likened the daughter of Zion to a comely and delicate
woman.
the shepherds with their flocks shall come unto her they
shall pitch their tents against her round about they shall
feed every one in his place.
prepare ye war against her Arise and let us go up at noon.
woe unto us for the day goeth away for the shadows of the
evening are stretched out.
Arise and let us go by night and let us destroy her palaces.
for thus hath the lord of hosts said Hew ye down trees and
cast a mount against Jerusalem this is the city to be
visited she is wholly oppression in the midst of her.
as a fountain casteth out her waters so she casteth out her
wickedness violence and spoil is heard in her before me
continually is grief and wounds.
be thou instructed O Jerusalem lest my soul depart from
thee lest I make thee desolate a land not inhabited.
thus saith the lord of hosts they shall throughly glean the
remnant of Israel as a vine turn back thine hand as a
grapegatherer into the baskets.
to whom shall I speak and give warning that they may hear?
behold their ear is uncircumcised and they cannot hearken
behold the word of the lord is unto them a reproach they
have no delight in it.
therefore I Am full of the fury of the lord I Am weary with
holding in I will pour it out upon the children abroad and
upon the assembly of young men together for even the husband
with the wife shall be taken the aged with him that is full
of days.
and their houses shall be turned unto others with their
fields and wives together for I will stretch out my hand upon
the inhabitants of the land saith the lord.
for from the least of them even unto the greatest of them
every one is given to covetousness and from the prophet even
unto the priest every one dealeth falsely.
they have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people
slightly saying peace peace when there is no peace.
were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay
they were not at all ashamed Neither could they blush
therefore they shall fall among them that fall at the time
that I visit them they shall be cast down saith the lord.
thus saith the lord stand ye in the ways and see and ask
for the old paths where is the good way and walk therein
and ye shall find rest for your souls. but they said we will
not walk therein.
also I set watchmen over you saying hearken to the sound of
the trumpet. but they said we will not hearken.
therefore hear ye nations and know O congregation what is
among them.
hear O earth behold I will bring evil upon this people
even the fruit of their thoughts because they have not
hearkened unto my words nor to my law but rejected it.
to what purpose cometh there to me incense from Sheba and the
sweet cane from a far country? your burnt offerings are not
acceptable nor your sacrifices sweet unto me.
therefore thus saith the lord behold I will lay
stumblingblocks before this people and the fathers and the
sons together shall fall upon them the neighbour and his
friend shall perish.
thus saith the lord behold a people cometh from the north
country and a great nation shall be raised from the sides of
the earth.
they shall lay hold on bow and spear they are cruel and have
no mercy their voice roareth like the sea and they ride upon
horses set in array as men for war against thee O daughter
of Zion.
we have heard the fame thereof our hands wax feeble anguish
hath taken hold of us and pain as of a woman in travail.
go not forth into the field nor walk by the way for the
sword of the enemy and fear is on every side.
O daughter of my people gird thee with sackcloth and wallow
thyself in ashes make thee mourning as for an only son most
bitter lamentation for the spoiler shall suddenly come upon
us.
I have set thee for a tower and a fortress among my people
that thou mayest know and try their way.
they are all grievous revolters walking with slanders they
are brass and Iron they are all corrupters.
the bellows are burned the lead is consumed of the fire the
founder melteth in vain for the wicked are not plucked away.
reprobate Silver shall men call them because the lord hath
rejected them.
the word that came to Jeremiah from the lord saying
stand in the gate of the lord s house and proclaim there this
word and say hear the word of the lord all ye of Judah
that enter in at these gates to worship the lord.
thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel amend your
ways and your doings and I will cause you to dwell in this
place.
trust ye not in lying words saying the temple of the lord
the temple of the lord the temple of the lord are these.
for if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings if ye
throughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbour
if ye oppress not the stranger the fatherless and the widow
and shed not innocent blood in this place Neither walk after
other gods to your hurt
then will I cause you to dwell in this place in the land that
I gave to your fathers for ever and ever.
behold ye trust in lying words that cannot profit.
will ye steal murder and commit adultery and swear falsely
and burn incense unto Baal and walk after other gods whom ye
know not
and come and stand before me in this house which is called by
my name and say we are delivered to do all these
abominations?
is this house which is called by my name become a den of
robbers in your eyes? behold even I have seen it saith the
lord.
but go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh where I set
my name at the first and see what I did to it for the
wickedness of my people Israel.
and now because ye have done all these works saith the lord
and I spake unto you rising up early and speaking but ye
heard not and I called you but ye answered not
therefore will I do unto this house which is called by my
name wherein ye trust and unto the place which I gave to you
and to your fathers as I have done to Shiloh.
and I will cast you out of my sight as I have cast out all
your brethren even the whole seed of Ephraim.
therefore pray not thou for this people Neither lift up cry
nor prayer for them Neither make intercession to me for I
will not hear thee.
seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the
streets of Jerusalem?
the children gather wood and the fathers kindle the fire and
the women knead their dough to make cakes to the queen of
heaven and to pour out drink offerings unto other gods that
they may provoke me to anger.
do they provoke me to anger? saith the lord do they not
provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces?
therefore thus saith the lord God behold mine anger and my
fury shall be poured out upon this place upon man and upon
beast and upon the trees of the field and upon the fruit of
the ground and it shall burn and shall not be quenched.
thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel put your
burnt offerings unto your sacrifices and eat flesh.
for I spake not unto your fathers nor commanded them in the
day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt concerning
burnt offerings or sacrifices
but this thing commanded I them saying obey my voice and I
will be your God and ye shall be my people and walk ye in
all the ways that I have commanded you that it may be well
unto you.
but they hearkened not nor inclined their ear but walked in
the counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart and
went backward and not forward.
since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of
Egypt unto this day I have even sent unto you all my servants
the prophets daily rising up early and sending them
yet they hearkened not unto me nor inclined their ear but
hardened their neck they did worse than their fathers.
therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them but they
will not hearken to thee thou shalt also call unto them but
they will not answer thee.
but thou shalt say unto them this is a nation that obeyeth
not the voice of the lord their God nor receiveth correction
truth is perished and is cut off from their mouth.
cut off thine hair O Jerusalem and cast it away and take up
a lamentation on high places for the lord hath rejected and
forsaken the generation of his wrath.
for the children of Judah have done evil in my sight saith
the lord they have set their abominations in the house which
is called by my name to pollute it.
and they have built the high places of Tophet which is in the
valley of the son of Hinnom to burn their sons and their
daughters in the fire which I commanded them not Neither
came it into my heart.
therefore behold the days come saith the lord that it
shall no more be called Tophet nor the valley of the son of
Hinnom but the valley of slaughter for they shall bury in
Tophet till there be no place.
and the carcases of this people shall be meat for the fowls of
the heaven and for the beasts of the earth and none shall
fray them away.
then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah and from
the streets of Jerusalem the voice of mirth and the voice of
gladness the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the
bride for the land shall be desolate.
at that time saith the lord they shall bring out the bones
of the kings of Judah and the bones of his princes and the
bones of the priests and the bones of the prophets and the
bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem out of their graves
and they shall spread them before the sun and the moon and
all the host of heaven whom they have loved and whom they
have served and after whom they have walked and whom they
have sought and whom they have worshipped they shall not be
gathered nor be buried they shall be for dung upon the face
of the earth.
and death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue
of them that remain of this evil family which remain in all
the places whither I have driven them saith the lord of
hosts.
moreover thou shalt say unto them thus saith the lord shall
they fall and not Arise? shall he turn away and not return?
why then is this people of Jerusalem slidden back by a
perpetual backsliding? they hold fast deceit they refuse to
return.
I hearkened and heard but they spake not aright no man
repented him of his wickedness saying what have I done?
every one turned to his course as the horse rusheth into the
battle.
yea the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times and
the turtle and the crane and the swallow observe the time of
their coming but my people know not the judgment of the lord.
how do ye say we are wise and the law of the lord is with
us? lo certainly in vain made he it the pen of the scribes
is in vain.
the wise men are ashamed they are dismayed and taken lo
they have rejected the word of the lord and what wisdom is in
them?
therefore will I give their wives unto others and their
fields to them that shall inherit them for every one from the
least even unto the greatest is given to covetousness from
the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely.
for they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people
slightly saying peace peace when there is no peace.
were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay
they were not at all ashamed Neither could they blush
therefore shall they fall among them that fall in the time of
their visitation they shall be cast down saith the lord.
I will surely consume them saith the lord there shall be no
grapes on the vine nor figs on the fig tree and the leaf
shall fade and the things that I have given them shall pass
away from them.
why do we sit still? assemble yourselves and let us enter
into the defenced cities and let us be silent there for the
lord our God hath put us to silence and given us water of
gall to drink because we have sinned against the lord.
we looked for peace but no good came and for a time of
health and behold trouble
the snorting of his horses was heard from Dan the whole land
trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones for
they are come and have devoured the land and all that is in
it the city and those that dwell therein.
for behold I will send serpents cockatrices among you
which will not be charmed and they shall bite you saith the
lord.
when I would comfort myself against sorrow my heart is faint
in me.
behold the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people
because of them that dwell in a far country is not the lord
in Zion? is not her king in her? why have they provoked me to
anger with their graven images and with strange vanities?
the harvest is past the summer is ended and we are not
saved.
for the hurt of the daughter of my people Am I hurt I Am
black astonishment hath taken hold on me.
is there no balm in Gilead is there no Physician there? why
then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?
oh that my head were waters and mine eyes a fountain of
tears that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people
oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring
men that I might leave my people and go from them for they
be all adulterers an assembly of treacherous men.
and they bend their tongues like their bow for lies but they
are not valiant for the truth upon the earth for they proceed
from evil to evil and they know not me saith the lord.
take ye heed every one of his neighbour and trust ye not in
any brother for every brother will utterly supplant and
every neighbour will walk with slanders.
and they will deceive every one his neighbour and will not
speak the truth they have taught their tongue to speak lies
and weary themselves to commit iniquity.
thine habitation is in the midst of deceit through deceit
they refuse to know me saith the lord.
therefore thus saith the lord of hosts behold I will melt
them and try them for how shall I do for the daughter of my
people?
their tongue is as an arrow shot out it speaketh deceit one
speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth but in
heart he layeth his wait.
shall I not visit them for these things? saith the lord shall
not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
for the mountains will I take up a weeping and wailing and
for the habitations of the wilderness a lamentation because
they are burned up so that none can pass through them
Neither can men hear the voice of the cattle both the fowl of
the heavens and the beast are fled they are gone.
and I will make Jerusalem heaps and a den of dragons and I
will make the cities of Judah desolate without an inhabitant.
who is the wise man that may understand this? and who is he
to whom the mouth of the lord hath spoken that he may declare
it for what the land perisheth and is burned up like a
wilderness that none passeth through?
and the lord saith because they have forsaken my law which I
set before them and have not obeyed my voice Neither walked
therein
but have walked after the imagination of their own heart and
after Baalim which their fathers taught them
therefore thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel
behold I will feed them even this people with wormwood and
give them water of gall to drink.
I will scatter them also among the heathen whom Neither they
nor their fathers have known and I will send a sword after
them till I have consumed them.
thus saith the lord of hosts consider ye and call for the
mourning women that they may come and send for cunning
women that they may come
and let them make haste and take up a wailing for us that
our eyes may run down with tears and our eyelids gush out
with waters.
for a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion how are we
spoiled we are greatly confounded because we have forsaken
the land because our dwellings have cast us out.
yet hear the word of the lord O ye women and let your ear
receive the word of his mouth and teach your daughters
wailing and every one her neighbour lamentation.
for death is come up into our windows and is entered into our
palaces to cut off the children from without and the young
men from the streets.
speak thus saith the lord even the carcases of men shall
fall as dung upon the open field and as the handful after the
harvestman and none shall gather them.
thus saith the lord let not the wise man glory in his wisdom
Neither let the Mighty man glory in his might let not the
rich man glory in his Riches
but let him that glorieth glory in this that he understandeth
and knoweth me that I Am the lord which exercise
lovingkindness judgment and righteousness in the earth for
in these things I delight saith the lord.
behold the days come saith the lord that I will punish all
them which are circumcised with the uncircumcised
Egypt and Judah and Edom and the children of Ammon and
Moab and all that are in the utmost corners that dwell in
the wilderness for all these nations are uncircumcised and
all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart.
hear ye the word which the lord speaketh unto you O house of
Israel
thus saith the lord learn not the way of the heathen and be
not dismayed at the signs of heaven for the heathen are
dismayed at them.
for the customs of the people are vain for one cutteth a tree
out of the forest the work of the hands of the workman with
the axe.
they deck it with Silver and with gold they fasten it with
nails and with hammers that it move not.
they are upright as the palm tree but speak not they must
needs be borne because they cannot go. be not afraid of them
for they cannot do evil Neither also is it in them to do
good.
forasmuch as there is none like unto thee O lord thou art
great and thy name is great in might.
who would not fear thee O king of nations? for to thee doth
it appertain forasmuch as among all the wise men of the
nations and in all their kingdoms there is none like unto
thee.
but they are altogether brutish and foolish the stock is a
doctrine of vanities.
Silver spread into plates is brought from Tarshish and gold
from Uphaz the work of the workman and of the hands of the
founder blue and purple is their clothing they are all the
work of cunning men.
but the lord is the true God he is the living God and an
everlasting king at his wrath the earth shall tremble and
the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.
thus shall ye say unto them the gods that have not made the
heavens and the earth even they shall perish from the earth
and from under these heavens.
he hath made the earth by his power he hath established the
world by his wisdom and hath stretched out the heavens by his
discretion.
when he uttereth his voice there is a multitude of waters in
the heavens and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the
ends of the earth he maketh lightnings with rain and
bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.
every man is brutish in his knowledge every founder is
confounded by the graven image for his molten image is
falsehood and there is no breath in them.
they are vanity and the work of errors in the time of their
visitation they shall perish.
the portion of Jacob is not like them for he is the former of
all things and Israel is the rod of his inheritance the lord
of hosts is his name.
gather up thy wares out of the land O inhabitant of the
fortress.
for thus saith the lord behold I will sling out the
inhabitants of the land at this once and will distress them
that they may find it so.
woe is me for my hurt my wound is grievous but I said truly
this is a grief and I must bear it.
my tabernacle is spoiled and all my cords are broken my
children are gone forth of me and they are not there is none
to stretch forth my tent any more and to set up my curtains.
for the pastors are become brutish and have not sought the
lord therefore they shall not prosper and all their flocks
shall be scattered.
behold the noise of the bruit is come and a great commotion
out of the north country to make the cities of Judah
desolate and a den of dragons.
O lord I know that the way of man is not in himself it is
not in man that walketh to direct his steps.
O lord correct me but with judgment not in thine anger
lest thou bring me to nothing.
pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not and
upon the families that call not on thy name for they have
eaten up Jacob and devoured him and consumed him and have
made his habitation desolate.
the word that came to Jeremiah from the lord saying
hear ye the words of this covenant and speak unto the men of
Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem
and say thou unto them thus saith the lord God of Israel
cursed be the man that obeyeth not the words of this covenant
which I commanded your fathers in the day that I brought them
forth out of the land of Egypt from the Iron furnace saying
obey my voice and do them according to all which I command
you so shall ye be my people and I will be your God
that I may perform the oath which I have sworn unto your
fathers to give them a land flowing with milk and honey as
it is this day. then answered I and said so be it O lord.
then the lord said unto me proclaim all these words in the
cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem saying hear
ye the words of this covenant and do them.
for I earnestly protested unto your fathers in the day that I
brought them up out of the land of Egypt even unto this day
rising early and protesting saying obey my voice.
yet they obeyed not nor inclined their ear but walked every
one in the imagination of their evil heart therefore I will
bring upon them all the words of this covenant which I
commanded them to do but they did them not.
and the lord said unto me a conspiracy is found among the men
of Judah and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
they are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers
which refused to hear my words and they went after other gods
to serve them the house of Israel and the house of Judah have
broken my covenant which I made with their fathers.
therefore thus saith the lord behold I will bring evil upon
them which they shall not be able to escape and though they
shall cry unto me I will not hearken unto them.
then shall the cities of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem
go and cry unto the gods unto whom they offer incense but
they shall not save them at all in the time of their trouble.
for according to the number of thy cities were thy gods O
Judah and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem
have ye set up altars to that shameful thing even altars to
burn incense unto Baal.
therefore pray not thou for this people Neither lift up a cry
or prayer for them for I will not hear them in the time that
they cry unto me for their trouble.
what hath my beloved to do in mine house seeing she hath
wrought lewdness with many and the holy flesh is passed from
thee? when thou doest evil then thou rejoicest.
the lord called thy name a green olive tree fair and of
goodly fruit with the noise of a great tumult he hath kindled
fire upon it and the branches of it are broken.
for the lord of hosts that planted thee hath pronounced evil
against thee for the evil of the house of Israel and of the
house of Judah which they have done against themselves to
provoke me to anger in offering incense unto Baal.
and the lord hath given me knowledge of it and I know it
then thou shewedst me their doings.
but I was like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the
slaughter and I knew not that they had devised devices
against me saying let us destroy the tree with the fruit
thereof and let us cut him off from the land of the living
that his name may be no more remembered.
but O lord of hosts that judgest righteously that triest
the reins and the heart let me see thy vengeance on them for
unto thee have I revealed my cause.
therefore thus saith the lord of the men of Anathoth that
seek thy life saying prophesy not in the name of the lord
that thou die not by our hand
therefore thus saith the lord of hosts behold I will punish
them the young men shall die by the sword their sons and
their daughters shall die by famine
and there shall be no remnant of them for I will bring evil
upon the men of Anathoth even the year of their visitation.
righteous art thou O lord when I plead with thee yet let me
talk with thee of thy judgments wherefore doth the way of the
wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously?
thou hast planted them yea they have taken root they grow
yea they bring forth fruit thou art near in their mouth and
far from their reins.
but thou O lord knowest me thou hast seen me and tried
mine heart toward thee pull them out like sheep for the
slaughter and prepare them for the day of slaughter.
how long shall the land mourn and the herbs of every field
wither for the wickedness of them that dwell therein? the
beasts are consumed and the birds because they said he
shall not see our last end.
if thou hast run with the footmen and they have wearied thee
then how canst thou contend with horses? and if in the land of
peace wherein thou trustedst they wearied thee then how
wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?
for even thy brethren and the house of thy father even they
have dealt treacherously with thee yea they have called a
multitude after thee believe them not though they speak fair
words unto thee.
I have forsaken mine house I have left mine heritage I have
given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her
enemies.
mine heritage is unto me as a lion in the forest it crieth
out against me therefore have I hated it.
mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird the birds round
about are against her come ye assemble all the beasts of the
field come to devour.
many pastors have destroyed my vineyard they have trodden my
portion under foot they have made my pleasant portion a
desolate wilderness.
they have made it desolate and being desolate it mourneth
unto me the whole land is made desolate because no man
layeth it to heart.
the spoilers are come upon all high places through the
wilderness for the sword of the lord shall devour from the
one end of the land even to the other end of the land no
flesh shall have peace.
they have sown wheat but shall reap thorns they have put
themselves to pain but shall not profit and they shall be
ashamed of your revenues because of the fierce anger of the
lord.
thus saith the lord against all mine evil neighbours that
touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to
inherit behold I will pluck them out of their land and
pluck out the house of Judah from among them.
and it shall come to pass after that I have plucked them out
I will return and have compassion on them and will bring
them again every man to his heritage and every man to his
land.
and it shall come to pass if they will diligently learn the
ways of my people to swear by my name the lord liveth as
they taught my people to swear by Baal then shall they be
built in the midst of my people.
but if they will not obey I will utterly pluck up and destroy
that nation saith the lord.
thus saith the lord unto me go and get thee a linen girdle
and put it upon thy loins and put it not in water.
so I got a girdle according to the word of the lord and put
it on my loins.
and the word of the lord came unto me the second time saying
take the girdle that thou hast got which is upon thy loins
and Arise go to Euphrates and hide it there in a hole of the
rock.
so I went and hid it by Euphrates as the lord commanded me.
and it came to pass after many days that the lord said unto
me Arise go to Euphrates and take the girdle from thence
which I commanded thee to hide there.
then I went to Euphrates and digged and took the girdle from
the place where I had hid it and behold the girdle was
marred it was profitable for nothing.
then the word of the lord came unto me saying
thus saith the lord after this manner will I mar the pride of
Judah and the great pride of Jerusalem.
this evil people which refuse to hear my words which walk in
the imagination of their heart and walk after other gods to
serve them and to worship them shall even be as this girdle
which is good for nothing.
for as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man so have I
caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel and the
whole house of Judah saith the lord that they might be unto
me for a people and for a name and for a praise and for a
glory but they would not hear.
therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word thus saith the
lord God of Israel every bottle shall be filled with wine
and they shall say unto thee do we not certainly know that
every bottle shall be filled with wine?
then shalt thou say unto them thus saith the lord behold I
will fill all the inhabitants of this land even the kings
that sit upon David s throne and the priests and the
prophets and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with
drunkenness.
and I will dash them one against another even the fathers and
the sons together saith the lord I will not pity nor spare
nor have mercy but destroy them.
hear ye and give ear be not proud for the lord hath spoken.
give glory to the lord your God before he cause darkness and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains and while
ye look for light he turn it into the shadow of death and
make it gross darkness.
but if ye will not hear it my soul shall weep in secret
places for your pride and mine eye shall weep sore and run
down with tears because the lord s flock is carried away
captive.
say unto the king and to the queen humble yourselves sit
down for your principalities shall come down even the crown
of your glory.
the cities of the south shall be shut up and none shall open
them Judah shall be carried away captive all of it it shall
be wholly carried away captive.
lift up your eyes and behold them that come from the north
where is the flock that was given thee thy beautiful flock?
what wilt thou say when he shall punish thee? for thou hast
taught them to be captains and as chief over thee shall not
sorrows take thee as a woman in travail?
and if thou say in thine heart wherefore come these things
upon me? for the greatness of thine iniquity are thy skirts
discovered and thy heels made bare.
can the Ethiopian change his skin or the leopard his spots?
then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil.
therefore will I scatter them as the stubble that passeth away
by the wind of the wilderness.
this is thy Lot the portion of thy measures from me saith
the lord because thou hast forgotten me and trusted in
falsehood.
therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face that thy
shame may appear.
I have seen thine adulteries and thy neighings the lewdness
of thy whoredom and thine abominations on the hills in the
fields. woe unto thee O Jerusalem wilt thou not be made
clean? when shall it once be?
the word of the lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the
dearth.
Judah mourneth and the gates thereof languish they are black
unto the ground and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.
and their nobles have sent their little ones to the waters
they came to the pits and found no water they returned with
their vessels empty they were ashamed and confounded and
covered their heads.
because the ground is chapt for there was no rain in the
earth the plowmen were ashamed they covered their heads.
yea the hind also calved in the field and forsook it
because there was no grass.
and the wild asses did stand in the high places they snuffed
up the wind like dragons their eyes did fail because there
was no grass.
O lord though our iniquities testify against us do thou it
for thy name s sake for our backslidings are many we have
sinned against thee.
O the hope of Israel the saviour thereof in time of trouble
why shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land and as a
wayfaring man that turneth aside to tarry for a night?
why shouldest thou be as a man astonied as a Mighty man that
cannot save? yet thou O lord art in the midst of us and we
are called by thy name leave us not.
thus saith the lord unto this people thus have they loved to
wander they have not refrained their feet therefore the lord
doth not accept them he will now remember their iniquity and
visit their sins.
then said the lord unto me pray not for this people for their
good.
when they fast I will not hear their cry and when they offer
burnt offering and an oblation I will not accept them but I
will consume them by the sword and by the famine and by the
pestilence.
then said I ah lord God behold the prophets say unto them
ye shall not see the sword Neither shall ye have famine but
I will give you assured peace in this place.
then the lord said unto me the prophets prophesy lies in my
name I sent them not Neither have I commanded them Neither
spake unto them they prophesy unto you a false vision and
divination and a thing of nought and the deceit of their
heart.
therefore thus saith the lord concerning the prophets that
prophesy in my name and I sent them not yet they say sword
and famine shall not be in this land by sword and famine
shall those prophets be consumed.
and the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the
streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword and
they shall have none to bury them them their wives nor
their sons nor their daughters for I will pour their
wickedness upon them.
therefore thou shalt say this word unto them let mine eyes
run down with tears night and day and let them not cease for
the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great
breach with a very grievous blow.
if I go forth into the field then behold the slain with the
sword and if I enter into the city then behold them that are
sick with famine yea both the prophet and the priest go
about into a land that they know not.
hast thou utterly rejected Judah? hath thy soul lothed Zion?
why hast thou smitten us and there is no healing for us? we
looked for peace and there is no good and for the time of
healing and behold trouble
we acknowledge O lord our wickedness and the iniquity of
our fathers for we have sinned against thee.
do not abhor us for thy name s sake do not disgrace the
throne of thy glory remember break not thy covenant with us.
are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can
cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not thou he
O lord our God? therefore we will wait upon thee for thou
hast made all these things.
then said the lord unto me though Moses and Samuel stood
before me yet my mind could not be toward this people cast
them out of my sight and let them go forth.
and it shall come to pass if they say unto thee whither
shall we go forth? then thou shalt tell them thus saith the
lord such as are for death to death and such as are for the
sword to the sword and such as are for the famine to the
famine and such as are for the captivity to the captivity.
and I will appoint over them four kinds saith the lord the
sword to slay and the dogs to tear and the fowls of the
heaven and the beasts of the earth to devour and destroy.
and I will cause them to be removed into all kingdoms of the
earth because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah
for that which he did in Jerusalem.
for who shall have pity upon thee O Jerusalem? or who shall
bemoan thee? or who shall go aside to ask how thou doest?
thou hast forsaken me saith the lord thou art gone backward
therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee and destroy
thee I Am weary with repenting.
and I will fan them with a fan in the gates of the land I
will bereave them of children I will destroy my people since
they return not from their ways.
their widows are increased to me above the sand of the seas I
have brought upon them against the mother of the young men a
spoiler at noonday I have caused him to fall upon it
suddenly and terrors upon the city.
she that hath borne seven languisheth she hath given up the
ghost her sun is gone down while it was yet day she hath
been ashamed and confounded and the residue of them will I
deliver to the sword before their enemies saith the lord.
woe is me my mother that thou hast borne me a man of strife
and a man of contention to the whole earth I have Neither
lent on usury nor men have lent to me on usury yet every one
of them doth curse me.
the lord said verily it shall be well with thy remnant
verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well in the time
of evil and in the time of affliction.
shall Iron break the northern Iron and the steel?
thy substance and thy treasures will I give to the spoil
without price and that for all thy sins even in all thy
borders.
and I will make thee to pass with thine enemies into a land
which thou knowest not for a fire is kindled in mine anger
which shall burn upon you.
O lord thou knowest remember me and visit me and revenge
me of my persecutors take me not away in thy longsuffering
know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke.
thy words were found and I did eat them and thy word was
unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart for I Am called
by thy name O lord God of hosts.
I sat not in the assembly of the mockers nor rejoiced I sat
alone because of thy hand for thou hast filled me with
indignation.
why is my pain perpetual and my wound incurable which
refuseth to be healed? wilt thou be altogether unto me as a
liar and as waters that fail?
therefore thus saith the lord if thou return then will I
bring thee again and thou shalt stand before me and if thou
take forth the precious from the vile thou shalt be as my
mouth let them return unto thee but return not thou unto
them.
and I will make thee unto this people a fenced brasen wall
and they shall fight against thee but they shall not prevail
against thee for I Am with thee to save thee and to deliver
thee saith the lord.
and I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked and I
will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.
the word of the lord came also unto me saying
thou shalt not take thee a wife Neither shalt thou have sons
or daughters in this place.
for thus saith the lord concerning the sons and concerning the
daughters that are born in this place and concerning their
mothers that bare them and concerning their fathers that
begat them in this land
they shall die of grievous deaths they shall not be lamented
Neither shall they be buried but they shall be as dung upon
the face of the earth and they shall be consumed by the
sword and by famine and their carcases shall be meat for the
fowls of heaven and for the beasts of the earth.
for thus saith the lord enter not into the house of mourning
Neither go to lament nor bemoan them for I have taken away my
peace from this people saith the lord even lovingkindness
and mercies.
both the great and the small shall die in this land they
shall not be buried Neither shall men lament for them nor
cut themselves nor make themselves bald for them
Neither shall men tear themselves for them in mourning to
comfort them for the dead Neither shall men give them the cup
of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother.
thou shalt not also go into the house of feasting to sit with
them to eat and to drink.
for thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel behold I
will cause to cease out of this place in your eyes and in
your days the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness the
voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.
and it shall come to pass when thou shalt shew this people
all these words and they shall say unto thee wherefore hath
the lord pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is
our iniquity? or what is our Sin that we have committed
against the lord our God?
then shalt thou say unto them because your fathers have
forsaken me saith the lord and have walked after other gods
and have served them and have worshipped them and have
forsaken me and have not kept my law
and ye have done worse than your fathers for behold ye walk
every one after the imagination of his evil heart that they
may not hearken unto me
therefore will I cast you out of this land into a land that ye
know not Neither ye nor your fathers and there shall ye
serve other gods day and night where I will not shew you
favour.
therefore behold the days come saith the lord that it
shall no more be said the lord liveth that brought up the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt
but the lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel
from the land of the north and from all the lands whither he
had driven them and I will bring them again into their land
that I gave unto their fathers.
behold I will send for many fishers saith the lord and they
shall fish them and after will I send for many hunters and
they shall hunt them from every mountain and from every hill
and out of the holes of the rocks.
for mine eyes are upon all their ways they are not hid from
my face Neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes.
and first I will recompense their iniquity and their Sin
double because they have defiled my land they have filled
mine inheritance with the carcases of their detestable and
abominable things.
O lord my strength and my fortress and my refuge in the day
of affliction the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends
of the earth and shall say surely our fathers have inherited
lies vanity and things wherein there is no profit.
shall a man make gods unto himself and they are no gods?
therefore behold I will this once cause them to know I will
cause them to know mine hand and my might and they shall know
that my name is the lord.
the Sin of Judah is written with a pen of Iron and with the
point of a diamond it is graven upon the table of their
heart and upon the horns of your altars
whilst their children remember their altars and their groves
by the green trees upon the high hills.
O my mountain in the field I will give thy substance and all
thy treasures to the spoil and thy high places for Sin
throughout all thy borders.
and thou even thyself shalt discontinue from thine heritage
that I gave thee and I will cause thee to serve thine enemies
in the land which thou knowest not for ye have kindled a fire
in mine anger which shall burn for ever.
thus saith the lord cursed be the man that trusteth in man
and maketh flesh his arm and whose heart departeth from the
lord.
for he shall be like the heath in the desert and shall not
see when good cometh but shall inhabit the parched places in
the wilderness in a salt land and not inhabited.
blessed is the man that trusteth in the lord and whose hope
the lord is.
for he shall be as a tree planted by the waters and that
spreadeth out her roots by the river and shall not see when
heat cometh but her leaf shall be green and shall not be
careful in the year of drought Neither shall cease from
yielding fruit.
the heart is deceitful above all things and desperately
wicked who can know it?
I the lord search the heart I try the reins even to give
every man according to his ways and according to the fruit of
his doings.
as the partridge sitteth on eggs and hatcheth them not so he
that getteth Riches and not by right shall leave them in the
midst of his days and at his end shall be a fool.
a glorious high throne from the beginning is the place of our
sanctuary.
O lord the hope of Israel all that forsake thee shall be
ashamed and they that depart from me shall be written in the
earth because they have forsaken the lord the fountain of
living waters.
heal me O lord and I shall be healed save me and I shall
be saved for thou art my praise.
behold they say unto me where is the word of the lord? let
it come now.
as for me I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow
thee Neither have I desired the woeful day thou knowest
that which came out of my lips was right before thee.
be not a terror unto me thou art my hope in the day of evil.
let them be confounded that persecute me but let not me be
confounded let them be dismayed but let not me be dismayed
bring upon them the day of evil and destroy them with double
destruction.
thus said the lord unto me go and stand in the gate of the
children of the people whereby the kings of Judah come in
and by the which they go out and in all the gates of
Jerusalem
and say unto them hear ye the word of the lord ye kings of
Judah and all Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem
that enter in by these gates
thus saith the lord take heed to yourselves and bear no
burden on the sabbath day nor bring it in by the gates of
Jerusalem
Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath
day Neither do ye any work but hallow ye the sabbath day as
I commanded your fathers.
but they obeyed not Neither inclined their ear but made
their neck stiff that they might not hear nor receive
instruction.
and it shall come to pass if ye diligently hearken unto me
saith the lord to bring in no burden through the gates of
this city on the sabbath day but hallow the sabbath day to
do no work therein
then shall there enter into the gates of this city kings and
princes sitting upon the throne of David riding in chariots
and on horses they and their princes the men of Judah and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem and this city shall remain for
ever.
and they shall come from the cities of Judah and from the
places about Jerusalem and from the land of Benjamin and
from the plain and from the mountains and from the south
bringing burnt offerings and sacrifices and meat offerings
and incense and bringing sacrifices of praise unto the house
of the lord.
but if ye will not hearken unto me to hallow the sabbath day
and not to bear a burden even entering in at the gates of
Jerusalem on the sabbath day then will I kindle a fire in the
gates thereof and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem
and it shall not be quenched.
the word which came to Jeremiah from the lord saying
Arise and go down to the potter s house and there I will
cause thee to hear my words.
then I went down to the potter s house and behold he
wrought a work on the wheels.
and the vessel that he made of clay was marred in the hand of
the potter so he made it again another vessel as seemed good
to the potter to make it.
then the word of the lord came to me saying
O house of Israel cannot I do with you as this potter? saith
the lord. behold as the clay is in the potter s hand so are
ye in mine hand O house of Israel.
at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation and
concerning a kingdom to pluck up and to pull down and to
destroy it
if that nation against whom I have pronounced turn from
their evil I will repent of the evil that I thought to do
unto them.
and at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation and
concerning a kingdom to build and to plant it
if it do evil in my sight that it obey not my voice then I
will repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit
them.
now therefore go to speak to the men of Judah and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem saying thus saith the lord behold
I frame evil against you and devise a device against you
return ye now every one from his evil way and make your ways
and your doings good.
and they said there is no hope but we will walk after our
own devices and we will every one do the imagination of his
evil heart.
therefore thus saith the lord ask ye now among the heathen
who hath heard such things the virgin of Israel hath done a
very horrible thing.
will a man leave the snow of Lebanon which cometh from the
rock of the field? or shall the cold flowing waters that come
from another place be forsaken?
because my people hath forgotten me they have burned incense
to vanity and they have caused them to stumble in their ways
from the ancient paths to walk in paths in a way not cast
up
to make their land desolate and a perpetual hissing every
one that passeth thereby shall be astonished and wag his
head.
I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy I
will shew them the back and not the face in the day of their
calamity.
then said they come and let us devise devices against
Jeremiah for the law shall not perish from the priest nor
counsel from the wise nor the word from the prophet. come
and let us smite him with the tongue and let us not give heed
to any of his words.
give heed to me O lord and hearken to the voice of them that
contend with me.
shall evil be recompensed for good? for they have digged a pit
for my soul. remember that I stood before thee to speak good
for them and to turn away thy wrath from them.
therefore deliver up their children to the famine and pour
out their blood by the force of the sword and let their wives
be bereaved of their children and be widows and let their
men be put to death let their young men be slain by the sword
in battle.
let a cry be heard from their houses when thou shalt bring a
troop suddenly upon them for they have digged a pit to take
me and hid snares for my feet.
yet lord thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay
me forgive not their iniquity Neither blot out their Sin
from thy sight but let them be overthrown before thee deal
thus with them in the time of thine anger.
thus saith the lord go and get a potter s earthen bottle and
take of the ancients of the people and of the ancients of the
priests
and go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom which is by
the entry of the east gate and proclaim there the words that
I shall tell thee
and say hear ye the word of the lord O kings of Judah and
inhabitants of Jerusalem thus saith the lord of hosts the
God of Israel behold I will bring evil upon this place the
which whosoever heareth his ears shall tingle.
because they have forsaken me and have estranged this place
and have burned incense in it unto other gods whom Neither
they nor their fathers have known nor the kings of Judah and
have filled this place with the blood of innocents
they have built also the high places of Baal to burn their
sons with fire for burnt offerings unto Baal which I
commanded not nor spake it Neither came it into my mind
therefore behold the days come saith the lord that this
place shall no more be called Tophet nor the valley of the
son of Hinnom but the valley of slaughter.
and I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in
this place and I will cause them to fall by the sword before
their enemies and by the hands of them that seek their lives
and their carcases will I give to be meat for the fowls of the
heaven and for the beasts of the earth.
and I will make this city desolate and an hissing every one
that passeth thereby shall be astonished and hiss because of
all the plagues thereof.
and I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the
flesh of their daughters and they shall eat every one the
flesh of his friend in the siege and straitness wherewith
their enemies and they that seek their lives shall straiten
them.
then shalt thou break the bottle in the sight of the men that
go with thee
and shalt say unto them thus saith the lord of hosts even so
will I break this people and this city as one breaketh a
potter s vessel that cannot be made whole again and they
shall bury them in Tophet till there be no place to bury.
thus will I do unto this place saith the lord and to the
inhabitants thereof and even make this city as Tophet
and the houses of Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of
Judah shall be defiled as the place of Tophet because of all
the houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense unto all
the host of heaven and have poured out drink offerings unto
other gods.
then came Jeremiah from Tophet whither the lord had sent him
to prophesy and he stood in the court of the lord s house
and said to all the people
thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel behold I
will bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil
that I have pronounced against it because they have hardened
their necks that they might not hear my words.
now Pashur the son of Immer the priest who was also chief
Governor in the house of the lord heard that Jeremiah
prophesied these things.
then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet and put him in the
stocks that were in the high gate of Benjamin which was by
the house of the lord.
and it came to pass on the morrow that Pashur brought forth
Jeremiah out of the stocks. then said Jeremiah unto him the
lord hath not called thy name Pashur but Magormissabib.
for thus saith the lord behold I will make thee a terror to
thyself and to all thy friends and they shall fall by the
sword of their enemies and thine eyes shall behold it and I
will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon and
he shall carry them captive into Babylon and shall slay them
with the sword.
moreover I will deliver all the strength of this city and all
the labours thereof and all the precious things thereof and
all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give into the
hand of their enemies which shall spoil them and take them
and carry them to Babylon.
and thou Pashur and all that dwell in thine house shall go
into captivity and thou shalt come to Babylon and there thou
shalt die and shalt be buried there thou and all thy
friends to whom thou hast prophesied lies.
O lord thou hast deceived me and I was deceived thou art
stronger than I and hast prevailed I Am in derision daily
every one mocketh me.
for since I spake I cried out I cried violence and spoil
because the word of the lord was made a reproach unto me and
a derision daily.
then I said I will not make mention of him nor speak any
more in his name. but his word was in mine heart as a burning
fire shut up in my bones and I was weary with forbearing and
I could not stay.
for I heard the defaming of many fear on every side. report
say they and we will report it. all my familiars watched for
my halting saying peradventure he will be enticed and we
shall prevail against him and we shall take our revenge on
him.
but the lord is with me as a Mighty terrible one therefore my
persecutors shall stumble and they shall not prevail they
shall be greatly ashamed for they shall not prosper their
everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten.
but O lord of hosts that triest the righteous and seest the
reins and the heart let me see thy vengeance on them for
unto thee have I opened my cause.
sing unto the lord praise ye the lord for he hath delivered
the soul of the poor from the hand of evildoers.
cursed be the day wherein I was born let not the day wherein
my mother bare me be blessed.
cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father saying a
man child is born unto thee making him very glad.
and let that man be as the cities which the lord overthrew
and repented not and let him hear the cry in the morning and
the shouting at noontide
because he slew me not from the womb or that my mother might
have been my grave and her womb to be always great with me.
wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labour and
sorrow that my days should be consumed with shame?
the word which came unto Jeremiah from the lord when king
Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Melchiah and
Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest saying
enquire I pray thee of the lord for us for Nebuchadrezzar
king of Babylon maketh war against us if so be that the lord
will deal with us according to all his wondrous works that he
may go up from us.
then said Jeremiah unto them thus shall ye say to Zedekiah
thus saith the lord God of Israel behold I will turn back
the weapons of war that are in your hands wherewith ye fight
against the king of Babylon and against the Chaldeans which
besiege you without the walls and I will assemble them into
the midst of this city.
and I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand
and with a strong arm even in anger and in fury and in
great wrath.
and I will smite the inhabitants of this city both man and
beast they shall die of a great pestilence.
and afterward saith the lord I will deliver Zedekiah king of
Judah and his servants and the people and such as are left
in this city from the pestilence from the sword and from the
famine into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and
into the hand of their enemies and into the hand of those
that seek their life and he shall smite them with the edge of
the sword he shall not spare them Neither have pity nor
have mercy.
and unto this people thou shalt say thus saith the lord
behold I set before you the way of life and the way of
death.
he that abideth in this city shall die by the sword and by
the famine and by the pestilence but he that goeth out and
falleth to the Chaldeans that besiege you he shall live and
his life shall be unto him for a prey.
for I have set my face against this city for evil and not for
good saith the lord it shall be given into the hand of the
king of Babylon and he shall burn it with fire.
and touching the house of the king of Judah say hear ye the
word of the lord
O house of David thus saith the lord execute judgment in the
morning and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of
the oppressor lest my fury go out like fire and burn that
none can quench it because of the evil of your doings.
behold I Am against thee O inhabitant of the valley and
rock of the plain saith the lord which say who shall come
down against us? or who shall enter into our habitations?
but I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings
saith the lord and I will kindle a fire in the forest
thereof and it shall devour all things round about it.
thus saith the lord go down to the house of the king of
Judah and speak there this word
and say hear the word of the lord O king of Judah that
sittest upon the throne of David thou and thy servants and
thy people that enter in by these gates
thus saith the lord execute ye judgment and righteousness
and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor and
do no wrong do no violence to the stranger the fatherless
nor the widow Neither shed innocent blood in this place.
for if ye do this thing indeed then shall there enter in by
the gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of
David riding in chariots and on horses he and his servants
and his people.
but if ye will not hear these words I swear by myself saith
the lord that this house shall become a desolation.
for thus saith the lord unto the king s house of Judah thou
art Gilead unto me and the head of Lebanon yet surely I will
make thee a wilderness and cities which are not inhabited.
and I will prepare destroyers against thee every one with his
weapons and they shall cut down thy choice cedars and cast
them into the fire.
and many nations shall pass by this city and they shall say
every man to his neighbour wherefore hath the lord done thus
unto this great city?
then they shall answer because they have forsaken the
covenant of the lord their God and worshipped other gods and
served them.
weep ye not for the dead Neither bemoan him but weep sore
for him that goeth away for he shall return no more nor see
his native country.
for thus saith the lord touching Shallum the son of Josiah
king of Judah which reigned instead of Josiah his father
which went forth out of this place he shall not return
thither any more
but he shall die in the place whither they have led him
captive and shall see this land no more.
woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness and
his chambers by wrong that useth his neighbour s service
without wages and giveth him not for his work
that saith I will build me a wide house and large chambers
and cutteth him out windows and it is cieled with cedar and
painted with vermilion.
shalt thou reign because thou closest thyself in cedar? did
not thy father eat and drink and do judgment and justice and
then it was well with him?
he judged the cause of the poor and needy then it was well
with him was not this to know me? saith the lord.
but thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy
covetousness and for to shed innocent blood and for
oppression and for violence to do it.
therefore thus saith the lord concerning Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah king of Judah they shall not lament for him saying
ah my brother or ah sister they shall not lament for him
saying ah lord or ah his glory
he shall be buried with the burial of an ass drawn and cast
forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.
go up to Lebanon and cry and lift up thy voice in Bashan
and cry from the passages for all thy lovers are destroyed.
I spake unto thee in thy prosperity but thou saidst I will
not hear. this hath been thy manner from thy youth that thou
obeyedst not my voice.
the wind shall eat up all thy pastors and thy lovers shall go
into captivity surely then shalt thou be ashamed and
confounded for all thy wickedness.
O inhabitant of Lebanon that makest thy nest in the cedars
how gracious shalt thou be when pangs come upon thee the pain
as of a woman in travail
as I live saith the lord though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim
king of Judah were the signet upon my right hand yet would I
pluck thee thence
and I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life
and into the hand of them whose face thou fearest even into
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and into the hand
of the Chaldeans.
and I will cast thee out and thy mother that bare thee into
another country where ye were not born and there shall ye
die.
but to the land whereunto they desire to return thither shall
they not return.
is this man Coniah a despised broken idol? is he a vessel
wherein is no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out he and
his seed and are cast into a land which they know not?
O earth earth earth hear the word of the lord.
thus saith the lord write ye this man childless a man that
shall not prosper in his days for no man of his seed shall
prosper sitting upon the throne of David and ruling any more
in Judah.
woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of
my pasture saith the lord.
therefore thus saith the lord God of Israel against the
pastors that feed my people ye have scattered my flock and
driven them away and have not visited them behold I will
visit upon you the evil of your doings saith the lord.
and I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries
whither I have driven them and will bring them again to their
folds and they shall be fruitful and increase.
and I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them
and they shall fear no more nor be dismayed Neither shall
they be lacking saith the lord.
behold the days come saith the lord that I will raise unto
David a righteous branch and a king shall reign and prosper
and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth.
in his days Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell
safely and this is his name whereby he shall be called the
lord our righteousness.
therefore behold the days come saith the lord that they
shall no more say the lord liveth which brought up the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt
but the lord liveth which brought up and which led the seed
of the house of Israel out of the north country and from all
countries whither I had driven them and they shall dwell in
their own land.
mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets all my
bones shake I Am like a drunken man and like a man whom wine
hath overcome because of the lord and because of the words
of his holiness.
for the land is full of adulterers for because of swearing
the land mourneth the pleasant places of the wilderness are
dried up and their course is evil and their force is not
right.
for both prophet and priest are profane yea in my house have
I found their wickedness saith the lord.
wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery ways in the
darkness they shall be driven on and fall therein for I
will bring evil upon them even the year of their visitation
saith the lord.
and I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria they
prophesied in Baal and caused my people Israel to err.
I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible
thing they commit adultery and walk in lies they strengthen
also the hands of evildoers that none doth return from his
wickedness they are all of them unto me as Sodom and the
inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.
therefore thus saith the lord of hosts concerning the
prophets behold I will feed them with wormwood and make
them drink the water of gall for from the prophets of
Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all the land.
thus saith the lord of hosts hearken not unto the words of
the prophets that prophesy unto you they make you vain they
speak a vision of their own heart and not out of the mouth of
the lord.
they say still unto them that despise me the lord hath said
ye shall have peace and they say unto every one that walketh
after the imagination of his own heart no evil shall come
upon you.
for who hath stood in the counsel of the lord and hath
perceived and heard his word? who hath marked his word and
heard it?
behold a whirlwind of the lord is gone forth in fury even a
grievous whirlwind it shall fall grievously upon the head of
the wicked.
the anger of the lord shall not return until he have
executed and till he have performed the thoughts of his
heart in the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly.
I have not sent these prophets yet they ran I have not
spoken to them yet they prophesied.
but if they had stood in my counsel and had caused my people
to hear my words then they should have turned them from their
evil way and from the evil of their doings.
Am I a God at hand saith the lord and not a God afar off?
can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see
him? saith the lord. do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the
lord.
I have heard what the prophets said that prophesy lies in my
name saying I have dreamed I have dreamed.
how long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that
prophesy lies? yea they are prophets of the deceit of their
own heart
which think to cause my people to forget my name by their
dreams which they tell every man to his neighbour as their
fathers have forgotten my name for Baal.
the prophet that hath a dream let him tell a dream and he
that hath my word let him speak my word faithfully. what is
the chaff to the wheat? saith the lord.
is not my word like as a fire? saith the lord and like a
hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?
therefore behold I Am against the prophets saith the lord
that steal my words every one from his neighbour.
behold I Am against the prophets saith the lord that use
their tongues and say he saith.
behold I Am against them that prophesy false dreams saith
the lord and do tell them and cause my people to err by
their lies and by their lightness yet I sent them not nor
commanded them therefore they shall not profit this people at
all saith the lord.
and when this people or the prophet or a priest shall ask
thee saying what is the burden of the lord? thou shalt then
say unto them what burden? I will even forsake you saith the
lord.
and as for the prophet and the priest and the people that
shall say the burden of the lord I will even punish that man
and his house.
thus shall ye say every one to his neighbour and every one to
his brother what hath the lord answered? and what hath the
lord spoken?
and the burden of the lord shall ye mention no more for every
man s word shall be his burden for ye have perverted the
words of the living God of the lord of hosts our God.
thus shalt thou say to the prophet what hath the lord
answered thee? and what hath the lord spoken?
but since ye say the burden of the lord therefore thus saith
the lord because ye say this word the burden of the lord
and I have sent unto you saying ye shall not say the burden
of the lord
therefore behold I even I will utterly forget you and I
will forsake you and the city that I gave you and your
fathers and cast you out of my presence
and I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you and a
perpetual shame which shall not be forgotten.
the lord shewed me and behold two baskets of figs were set
before the temple of the lord after that Nebuchadrezzar king
of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son of
Jehoiakim king of Judah and the princes of Judah with the
carpenters and smiths from Jerusalem and had brought them to
Babylon.
one basket had very good figs even like the figs that are
first ripe and the other basket had very naughty figs which
could not be eaten they were so bad.
then said the lord unto me what seest thou Jeremiah? and I
said figs the good figs very good and the evil very evil
that cannot be eaten they are so evil.
again the word of the lord came unto me saying
thus saith the lord the God of Israel like these good figs
so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of
Judah whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the
Chaldeans for their good.
for I will set mine eyes upon them for good and I will bring
them again to this land and I will build them and not pull
them down and I will plant them and not pluck them up.
and I will give them an heart to know me that I Am the lord
and they shall be my people and I will be their God for they
shall return unto me with their whole heart.
and as the evil figs which cannot be eaten they are so evil
surely thus saith the lord so will I give Zedekiah the king
of Judah and his princes and the residue of Jerusalem that
remain in this land and them that dwell in the land of Egypt
and I will deliver them to be removed into all the kingdoms of
the earth for their hurt to be a reproach and a proverb a
taunt and a curse in all places whither I shall drive them.
and I will send the sword the famine and the pestilence
among them till they be consumed from off the land that I
gave unto them and to their fathers.
the word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of
Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king
of Judah that was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon
the which Jeremiah the prophet spake unto all the people of
Judah and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem saying
from the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon king of
Judah even unto this day that is the three and twentieth
year the word of the lord hath come unto me and I have
spoken unto you rising early and speaking but ye have not
hearkened.
and the lord hath sent unto you all his servants the prophets
rising early and sending them but ye have not hearkened nor
inclined your ear to hear.
they said turn ye again now every one from his evil way and
from the evil of your doings and dwell in the land that the
lord hath given unto you and to your fathers for ever and
ever
and go not after other gods to serve them and to worship
them and provoke me not to anger with the works of your
hands and I will do you no hurt.
yet ye have not hearkened unto me saith the lord that ye
might provoke me to anger with the works of your hands to your
own hurt.
therefore thus saith the lord of hosts because ye have not
heard my words
behold I will send and take all the families of the north
saith the lord and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon my
servant and will bring them against this land and against
the inhabitants thereof and against all these nations round
about and will utterly destroy them and make them an
astonishment and an hissing and perpetual desolations.
moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth and the
voice of gladness the voice of the bridegroom and the voice
of the bride the sound of the millstones and the light of
the candle.
and this whole land shall be a desolation and an
astonishment and these nations shall serve the king of
Babylon seventy years.
and it shall come to pass when seventy years are
accomplished that I will punish the king of Babylon and that
nation saith the lord for their iniquity and the land of
the Chaldeans and will make it perpetual desolations.
and I will bring upon that land all my words which I have
pronounced against it even all that is written in this book
which Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.
for many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of
them also and I will recompense them according to their
deeds and according to the works of their own hands.
for thus saith the lord God of Israel unto me take the wine
cup of this fury at my hand and cause all the nations to
whom I send thee to drink it.
and they shall drink and be moved and be mad because of the
sword that I will send among them.
then took I the cup at the lord s hand and made all the
nations to drink unto whom the lord had sent me
to wit Jerusalem and the cities of Judah and the kings
thereof and the princes thereof to make them a desolation
an astonishment an hissing and a curse as it is this day
Pharaoh king of Egypt and his servants and his princes and
all his people
and all the mingled people and all the kings of the land of
Uz and all the kings of the land of the Philistines and
Ashkelon and Azzah and Ekron and the remnant of Ashdod
Edom and Moab and the children of Ammon
and all the kings of Tyrus and all the kings of Zidon and
the kings of the isles which are beyond the sea
Dedan and Tema and Buz and all that are in the utmost
corners
and all the kings of Arabia and all the kings of the mingled
people that dwell in the desert
and all the kings of Zimri and all the kings of Elam and all
the kings of the Medes
and all the kings of the north far and near one with
another and all the kingdoms of the world which are upon the
face of the earth and the king of Sheshach shall drink after
them.
therefore thou shalt say unto them thus saith the lord of
hosts the God of Israel drink ye and be drunken and spue
and fall and rise no more because of the sword which I will
send among you.
and it shall be if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand
to drink then shalt thou say unto them thus saith the lord
of hosts ye shall certainly drink.
for lo I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by
my name and should ye be utterly unpunished? ye shall not be
unpunished for I will call for a sword upon all the
inhabitants of the earth saith the lord of hosts.
therefore prophesy thou against them all these words and say
unto them the lord shall roar from on high and utter his
voice from his holy habitation he shall mightily roar upon
his habitation he shall give a shout as they that tread the
grapes against all the inhabitants of the earth.
a noise shall come even to the ends of the earth for the lord
hath a controversy with the nations he will plead with all
flesh he will give them that are wicked to the sword saith
the lord.
thus saith the lord of hosts behold evil shall go forth from
nation to nation and a great whirlwind shall be raised up
from the coasts of the earth.
and the slain of the lord shall be at that day from one end of
the earth even unto the other end of the earth they shall not
be lamented Neither gathered nor buried they shall be dung
upon the ground.
howl ye shepherds and cry and wallow yourselves in the
ashes ye principal of the flock for the days of your
slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished and ye
shall fall like a pleasant vessel.
and the shepherds shall have no way to flee nor the principal
of the flock to escape.
a voice of the cry of the shepherds and an howling of the
principal of the flock shall be heard for the lord hath
spoiled their pasture.
and the peaceable habitations are cut down because of the
fierce anger of the lord.
he hath forsaken his covert as the lion for their land is
desolate because of the fierceness of the oppressor and
because of his fierce anger.
in the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah
king of Judah came this word from the lord saying
thus saith the lord stand in the court of the lord s house
and speak unto all the cities of Judah which come to worship
in the lord s house all the words that I command thee to
speak unto them diminish not a word
if so be they will hearken and turn every man from his evil
way that I may repent me of the evil which I purpose to do
unto them because of the evil of their doings.
and thou shalt say unto them thus saith the lord if ye will
not hearken to me to walk in my law which I have set before
you
to hearken to the words of my servants the prophets whom I
sent unto you both rising up early and sending them but ye
have not hearkened
then will I make this house like Shiloh and will make this
city a curse to all the nations of the earth.
so the priests and the prophets and all the people heard
Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the lord.
now it came to pass when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking
all that the lord had commanded him to speak unto all the
people that the priests and the prophets and all the people
took him saying thou shalt surely die.
why hast thou prophesied in the name of the lord saying this
house shall be like Shiloh and this city shall be desolate
without an inhabitant? and all the people were gathered
against Jeremiah in the house of the lord.
when the princes of Judah heard these things then they came
up from the king s house unto the house of the lord and sat
down in the entry of the new gate of the lord s house.
then spake the priests and the prophets unto the princes and
to all the people saying this man is worthy to die for he
hath prophesied against this city as ye have heard with your
ears.
then spake Jeremiah unto all the princes and to all the
people saying the lord sent me to prophesy against this
house and against this city all the words that ye have heard.
therefore now amend your ways and your doings and obey the
voice of the lord your God and the lord will repent him of
the evil that he hath pronounced against you.
as for me behold I Am in your hand do with me as seemeth
good and meet unto you.
but know ye for certain that if ye put me to death ye shall
surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves and upon this
city and upon the inhabitants thereof for of a truth the
lord hath sent me unto you to speak all these words in your
ears.
then said the princes and all the people unto the priests and
to the prophets this man is not worthy to die for he hath
spoken to us in the name of the lord our God.
then rose up certain of the elders of the land and spake to
all the assembly of the people saying
Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king
of Judah and spake to all the people of Judah saying thus
saith the lord of hosts Zion shall be plowed like a field
and Jerusalem shall become heaps and the mountain of the
house as the high places of a forest.
did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him at all to
death? did he not fear the lord and besought the lord and
the lord repented him of the evil which he had pronounced
against them? thus might we procure great evil against our
souls.
and there was also a man that prophesied in the name of the
lord Urijah the son of Shemaiah of Kirjathjearim who
prophesied against this city and against this land according
to all the words of Jeremiah.
and when Jehoiakim the king with all his Mighty men and all
the princes heard his words the king sought to put him to
death but when Urijah heard it he was afraid and fled and
went into Egypt
and Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt namely Elnathan
the son of Achbor and certain men with him into Egypt.
and they fetched forth Urijah out of Egypt and brought him
unto Jehoiakim the king who slew him with the sword and cast
his dead body into the graves of the common people.
nevertheless the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with
Jeremiah that they should not give him into the hand of the
people to put him to death.
in the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah
king of Judah came this word unto Jeremiah from the lord
saying
thus saith the lord to me make thee bonds and yokes and put
them upon thy neck
and send them to the king of Edom and to the king of Moab
and to the king of the Ammonites and to the king of Tyrus
and to the king of Zidon by the hand of the messengers which
come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king of Judah
and command them to say unto their masters thus saith the
lord of hosts the God of Israel thus shall ye say unto your
masters
I have made the earth the man and the beast that are upon the
ground by my great power and by my outstretched arm and have
given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me.
and now have I given all these lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon my servant and the beasts
of the field have I given him also to serve him.
and all nations shall serve him and his son and his son s
son until the very time of his land come and then many
nations and great kings shall serve themselves of him.
and it shall come to pass that the nation and kingdom which
will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon
and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of
Babylon that nation will I punish saith the lord with the
sword and with the famine and with the pestilence until I
have consumed them by his hand.
therefore hearken not ye to your prophets nor to your
diviners nor to your dreamers nor to your enchanters nor to
your sorcerers which speak unto you saying ye shall not
serve the king of Babylon
for they prophesy a lie unto you to remove you far from your
land and that I should drive you out and ye should perish.
but the nations that bring their neck under the yoke of the
king of Babylon and serve him those will I let remain still
in their own land saith the lord and they shall till it and
dwell therein.
I spake also to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these
words saying bring your necks under the yoke of the king of
Babylon and serve him and his people and live.
why will ye die thou and thy people by the sword by the
famine and by the pestilence as the lord hath spoken against
the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?
therefore hearken not unto the words of the prophets that
speak unto you saying ye shall not serve the king of
Babylon for they prophesy a lie unto you.
for I have not sent them saith the lord yet they prophesy a
lie in my name that I might drive you out and that ye might
perish ye and the prophets that prophesy unto you.
also I spake to the priests and to all this people saying
thus saith the lord hearken not to the words of your prophets
that prophesy unto you saying behold the vessels of the
lord s house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon
for they prophesy a lie unto you.
hearken not unto them serve the king of Babylon and live
wherefore should this city be laid waste?
but if they be prophets and if the word of the lord be with
them let them now make intercession to the lord of hosts
that the vessels which are left in the house of the lord and
in the house of the king of Judah and at Jerusalem go not to
Babylon.
for thus saith the lord of hosts concerning the pillars and
concerning the sea and concerning the bases and concerning
the residue of the vessels that remain in this city.
which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took not when he carried
away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from
Jerusalem to Babylon and all the nobles of Judah and
Jerusalem
yea thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel
concerning the vessels that remain in the house of the lord
and in the house of the king of Judah and of Jerusalem
they shall be carried to Babylon and there shall they be
until the day that I visit them saith the lord then will I
bring them up and restore them to this place.
and it came to pass the same year in the beginning of the
reign of Zedekiah king of Judah in the fourth year and in
the fifth month that Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet
which was of Gibeon spake unto me in the house of the lord
in the presence of the priests and of all the people saying
thus speaketh the lord of hosts the God of Israel saying I
have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.
within two full years will I bring again into this place all
the vessels of the lord s house that Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon took away from this place and carried them to
Babylon
and I will bring again to this place Jeconiah the son of
Jehoiakim king of Judah with all the captives of Judah that
went into Babylon saith the lord for I will break the yoke
of the king of Babylon.
then the prophet Jeremiah said unto the prophet Hananiah in
the presence of the priests and in the presence of all the
people that stood in the house of the lord
even the prophet Jeremiah said Amen the lord do so the lord
perform thy words which thou hast prophesied to bring again
the vessels of the lord s house and all that is carried away
captive from Babylon into this place.
nevertheless hear thou now this word that I speak in thine
ears and in the ears of all the people
the prophets that have been before me and before thee of old
prophesied both against many countries and against great
kingdoms of war and of evil and of pestilence.
the prophet which prophesieth of peace when the word of the
prophet shall come to pass then shall the prophet be known
that the lord hath truly sent him.
then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from off the prophet
Jeremiah s neck and brake it.
and Hananiah spake in the presence of all the people saying
thus saith the lord even so will I break the yoke of
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon from the neck of all nations
within the space of two full years. and the prophet Jeremiah
went his way.
then the word of the lord came unto Jeremiah the prophet
after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from off
the neck of the prophet Jeremiah saying
go and tell Hananiah saying thus saith the lord thou hast
broken the yokes of wood but thou shalt make for them yokes
of Iron.
for thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel I have
put a yoke of Iron upon the neck of all these nations that
they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and they shall
serve him and I have given him the beasts of the field also.
then said the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the prophet hear
now Hananiah the lord hath not sent thee but thou makest
this people to trust in a lie.
therefore thus saith the lord behold I will cast thee from
off the face of the earth this year thou shalt die because
thou hast taught rebellion against the lord.
so Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh
month.
now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the
prophet sent from Jerusalem unto the residue of the elders
which were carried away captives and to the priests and to
the prophets and to all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had
carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon
 after that Jeconiah the king and the queen and the eunuchs
the princes of Judah and Jerusalem and the carpenters and
the smiths were departed from Jerusalem
by the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan and Gemariah the son
of Hilkiah whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto Babylon to
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon saying
thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel unto all that
are carried away captives whom I have caused to be carried
away from Jerusalem unto Babylon
build ye houses and dwell in them and plant gardens and eat
the fruit of them
take ye wives and beget sons and daughters and take wives
for your sons and give your daughters to husbands that they
may bear sons and daughters that ye may be increased there
and not diminished.
and seek the peace of the city whither I have caused you to be
carried away captives and pray unto the lord for it for in
the peace thereof shall ye have peace.
for thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel let not
your prophets and your diviners that be in the midst of you
deceive you Neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause to
be dreamed.
for they prophesy falsely unto you in my name I have not sent
them saith the lord.
for thus saith the lord that after seventy years be
accomplished at Babylon I will visit you and perform my good
word toward you in causing you to return to this place.
for I know the thoughts that I think toward you saith the
lord thoughts of peace and not of evil to give you an
expected end.
then shall ye call upon me and ye shall go and pray unto me
and I will hearken unto you.
and ye shall seek me and find me when ye shall search for me
with all your heart.
and I will be found of you saith the lord and I will turn
away your captivity and I will gather you from all the
nations and from all the places whither I have driven you
saith the lord and I will bring you again into the place
whence I caused you to be carried away captive.
because ye have said the lord hath raised us up prophets in
Babylon
know that thus saith the lord of the king that sitteth upon
the throne of David and of all the people that dwelleth in
this city and of your brethren that are not gone forth with
you into captivity
thus saith the lord of hosts behold I will send upon them
the sword the famine and the pestilence and will make them
like vile figs that cannot be eaten they are so evil.
and I will persecute them with the sword with the famine and
with the pestilence and will deliver them to be removed to
all the kingdoms of the earth to be a curse and an
astonishment and an hissing and a reproach among all the
nations whither I have driven them
because they have not hearkened to my words saith the lord
which I sent unto them by my servants the prophets rising up
early and sending them but ye would not hear saith the lord.
hear ye therefore the word of the lord all ye of the
captivity whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon
thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel of Ahab the
son of Kolaiah and of Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah which
prophesy a lie unto you in my name behold I will deliver
them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and he
shall slay them before your eyes
and of them shall be taken up a curse by all the captivity of
Judah which are in Babylon saying the lord make thee like
Zedekiah and like Ahab whom the king of Babylon roasted in
the fire
because they have committed villany in Israel and have
committed adultery with their neighbours wives and have
spoken lying words in my name which I have not commanded
them even I know and Am a witness saith the lord.
thus shalt thou also speak to Shemaiah the Nehelamite saying
thus speaketh the lord of hosts the God of Israel saying
because thou hast sent letters in thy name unto all the people
that are at Jerusalem and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah
the priest and to all the priests saying
the lord hath made thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada the
priest that ye should be officers in the house of the lord
for every man that is mad and maketh himself a prophet that
thou shouldest put him in prison and in the stocks.
now therefore why hast thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth
which maketh himself a prophet to you?
for therefore he sent unto us in Babylon saying this
captivity is long build ye houses and dwell in them and
plant gardens and eat the fruit of them.
and Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the ears of
Jeremiah the prophet.
then came the word of the lord unto Jeremiah saying
send to all them of the captivity saying thus saith the lord
concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite because that Shemaiah hath
prophesied unto you and I sent him not and he caused you to
trust in a lie
therefore thus saith the lord behold I will punish Shemaiah
the Nehelamite and his seed he shall not have a man to dwell
among this people Neither shall he behold the good that I
will do for my people saith the lord because he hath taught
rebellion against the lord.
the word that came to Jeremiah from the lord saying
thus speaketh the lord God of Israel saying write thee all
the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book.
for lo the days come saith the lord that I will bring
again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah saith the
lord and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave
to their fathers and they shall possess it.
and these are the words that the lord spake concerning Israel
and concerning Judah.
for thus saith the lord we have heard a voice of trembling
of fear and not of peace.
ask ye now and see whether a man doth travail with child?
wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins as a
woman in travail and all faces are turned into paleness?
alas for that day is great so that none is like it it is
even the time of Jacob s trouble but he shall be saved out of
it.
for it shall come to pass in that day saith the lord of
hosts that I will break his yoke from off thy neck and will
burst thy bonds and strangers shall no more serve themselves
of him
but they shall serve the lord their God and David their king
whom I will raise up unto them.
therefore fear thou not O my servant Jacob saith the lord
Neither be dismayed O Israel for lo I will save thee from
afar and thy seed from the land of their captivity and Jacob
shall return and shall be in rest and be quiet and none
shall make him afraid.
for I Am with thee saith the lord to save thee though I
make a full end of all nations whither I have scattered thee
yet I will not make a full end of thee but I will correct
thee in measure and will not leave thee altogether
unpunished.
for thus saith the lord thy bruise is incurable and thy
wound is grievous.
there is none to plead thy cause that thou mayest be bound
up thou hast no healing medicines.
all thy lovers have forgotten thee they seek thee not for I
have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy with the
chastisement of a cruel one for the multitude of thine
iniquity because thy sins were increased.
why criest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable
for the multitude of thine iniquity because thy sins were
increased I have done these things unto thee.
therefore all they that devour thee shall be devoured and all
thine adversaries every one of them shall go into captivity
and they that spoil thee shall be a spoil and all that prey
upon thee will I give for a prey.
for I will restore health unto thee and I will heal thee of
thy wounds saith the lord because they called thee an
outcast saying this is Zion whom no man seeketh after.
thus saith the lord behold I will bring again the captivity
of Jacob s tents and have mercy on his dwellingplaces and
the city shall be builded upon her own heap and the palace
shall remain after the manner thereof.
and out of them shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of
them that make merry and I will multiply them and they shall
not be few I will also glorify them and they shall not be
small.
their children also shall be as aforetime and their
congregation shall be established before me and I will punish
all that oppress them.
and their nobles shall be of themselves and their Governor
shall proceed from the midst of them and I will cause him to
draw near and he shall approach unto me for who is this that
engaged his heart to approach unto me? saith the lord.
and ye shall be my people and I will be your God.
behold the whirlwind of the lord goeth forth with fury a
continuing whirlwind it shall fall with pain upon the head of
the wicked.
the fierce anger of the lord shall not return until he hath
done it and until he have performed the intents of his heart
in the latter days ye shall consider it.
at the same time saith the lord will I be the God of all the
families of Israel and they shall be my people.
thus saith the lord the people which were left of the sword
found grace in the wilderness even Israel when I went to
cause him to rest.
the lord hath appeared of old unto me saying yea I have
loved thee with an everlasting love therefore with
lovingkindness have I drawn thee.
again I will build thee and thou shalt be built O virgin of
Israel thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets and
shalt go forth in the dances of them that make merry.
thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria the
planters shall plant and shall eat them as common things.
for there shall be a day that the watchmen upon the mount
Ephraim shall cry Arise ye and let us go up to Zion unto the
lord our God.
for thus saith the lord sing with gladness for Jacob and
shout among the chief of the nations publish ye praise ye
and say O lord save thy people the remnant of Israel.
behold I will bring them from the north country and gather
them from the coasts of the earth and with them the blind and
the lame the woman with child and her that travaileth with
child together a great company shall return thither.
they shall come with weeping and with supplications will I
lead them I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters
in a straight way wherein they shall not stumble for I Am a
father to Israel and Ephraim is my firstborn.
hear the word of the lord O ye nations and declare it in the
isles afar off and say he that scattered Israel will gather
him and keep him as a Shepherd doth his flock.
for the lord hath redeemed Jacob and ransomed him from the
hand of him that was stronger than he.
therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion and
shall flow together to the goodness of the lord for wheat
and for wine and for oil and for the young of the flock and
of the herd and their soul shall be as a watered garden and
they shall not sorrow any more at all.
then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance both young men and
old together for I will turn their mourning into joy and
will comfort them and make them rejoice from their sorrow.
and I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness and
my people shall be satisfied with my goodness saith the lord.
thus saith the lord a voice was heard in Ramah lamentation
and bitter weeping Rahel weeping for her children refused to
be comforted for her children because they were not.
thus saith the lord refrain thy voice from weeping and thine
eyes from tears for thy work shall be rewarded saith the
lord and they shall come again from the land of the enemy.
and there is hope in thine end saith the lord that thy
children shall come again to their own border.
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus thou hast
chastised me and I was chastised as a bullock unaccustomed
to the yoke turn thou me and I shall be turned for thou art
the lord my God.
surely after that I was turned I repented and after that I
was instructed I smote upon my thigh I was ashamed yea
even confounded because I did bear the reproach of my youth.
is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I
spake against him I do earnestly remember him still
therefore my bowels are troubled for him I will surely have
mercy upon him saith the lord.
set thee up waymarks make thee high heaps set thine heart
toward the highway even the way which thou wentest turn
again O virgin of Israel turn again to these thy cities.
how long wilt thou go about O thou backsliding daughter? for
the lord hath created a new thing in the earth a woman shall
compass a man.
thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel as yet they
shall use this speech in the land of Judah and in the cities
thereof when I shall bring again their captivity the lord
bless thee O habitation of justice and mountain of holiness.
and there shall dwell in Judah itself and in all the cities
thereof together husbandmen and they that go forth with
flocks.
for I have satiated the weary soul and I have replenished
every sorrowful soul.
upon this I awaked and beheld and my sleep was sweet unto
me.
behold the days come saith the lord that I will sow the
house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man
and with the seed of beast.
and it shall come to pass that like as I have watched over
them to pluck up and to break down and to throw down and
to destroy and to afflict so will I watch over them to
build and to plant saith the lord.
in those days they shall say no more the fathers have eaten a
sour grape and the children s teeth are set on edge.
but every one shall die for his own iniquity every man that
eateth the sour grape his teeth shall be set on edge.
behold the days come saith the lord that I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of
Judah
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers
in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of
the land of Egypt which my covenant they brake although I
was an husband unto them saith the lord
but this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house
of Israel after those days saith the lord I will put my law
in their inward parts and write it in their hearts and will
be their God and they shall be my people.
and they shall teach no more every man his neighbour and
every man his brother saying know the lord for they shall
all know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them
saith the lord for I will forgive their iniquity and I will
remember their Sin no more.
thus saith the lord which giveth the sun for a light by day
and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by
night which divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar the
lord of hosts is his name
if those ordinances depart from before me saith the lord
then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation
before me for ever.
thus saith the lord if heaven above can be measured and the
foundations of the earth searched out beneath I will also
cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they have done
saith the lord.
behold the days come saith the lord that the city shall be
built to the lord from the tower of Hananeel unto the gate of
the corner.
and the measuring line shall yet go forth over against it upon
the hill Gareb and shall compass about to Goath.
and the whole valley of the dead bodies and of the ashes and
all the fields unto the brook of Kidron unto the corner of
the horse gate toward the east shall be holy unto the lord
it shall not be plucked up nor thrown down any more for ever.
the word that came to Jeremiah from the lord in the tenth year
of Zedekiah king of Judah which was the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadrezzar.
for then the king of Babylon s army besieged Jerusalem and
Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the prison
which was in the king of Judah s house.
for Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up saying wherefore
dost thou prophesy and say thus saith the lord behold I
will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon and
he shall take it
and Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape out of the hand of
the Chaldeans but shall surely be delivered into the hand of
the king of Babylon and shall speak with him mouth to mouth
and his eyes shall behold his eyes
and he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon and there shall he be
until I visit him saith the lord though ye fight with the
Chaldeans ye shall not prosper.
and Jeremiah said the word of the lord came unto me saying
behold Hanameel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall come
unto thee saying buy thee my field that is in Anathoth for
the right of redemption is thine to buy it.
so Hanameel mine uncle s son came to me in the court of the
prison according to the word of the lord and said unto me
buy my field I pray thee that is in Anathoth which is in
the country of Benjamin for the right of inheritance is
thine and the redemption is thine buy it for thyself. then I
knew that this was the word of the lord.
and I bought the field of Hanameel my uncle s son that was in
Anathoth and weighed him the money even seventeen shekels of
Silver.
and I subscribed the evidence and sealed it and took
witnesses and weighed him the money in the balances.
so I took the evidence of the purchase both that which was
sealed according to the law and custom and that which was
open
and I gave the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of
Neriah the son of Maaseiah in the sight of Hanameel mine
uncle s son and in the presence of the witnesses that
subscribed the book of the purchase before all the Jews that
sat in the court of the prison.
and I charged Baruch before them saying
thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel take these
evidences this evidence of the purchase both which is
sealed and this evidence which is open and put them in an
earthen vessel that they may continue many days.
for thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel houses
and fields and vineyards shall be possessed again in this
land.
now when I had delivered the evidence of the purchase unto
Baruch the son of Neriah I prayed unto the lord saying
ah lord God behold thou hast made the heaven and the earth
by thy great power and stretched out arm and there is nothing
too hard for thee
thou shewest lovingkindness unto thousands and recompensest
the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children
after them the great the Mighty God the lord of hosts is
his name
great in counsel and Mighty in work for thine eyes are open
upon all the ways of the sons of men to give every one
according to his ways and according to the fruit of his
doings
which hast set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt even
unto this day and in Israel and among other men and hast
made thee a name as at this day
and hast brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of
Egypt with signs and with wonders and with a strong hand
and with a stretched out arm and with great terror
and hast given them this land which thou didst swear to their
fathers to give them a land flowing with milk and honey
and they came in and possessed it but they obeyed not thy
voice Neither walked in thy law they have done nothing of
all that thou commandedst them to do therefore thou hast
caused all this evil to come upon them
behold the mounts they are come unto the city to take it and
the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans that fight
against it because of the sword and of the famine and of
the pestilence and what thou hast spoken is come to pass
and behold thou seest it.
and thou hast said unto me O lord God buy thee the field for
money and take witnesses for the city is given into the hand
of the Chaldeans.
then came the word of the lord unto Jeremiah saying
behold I Am the lord the God of all flesh is there any
thing too hard for me?
therefore thus saith the lord behold I will give this city
into the hand of the Chaldeans and into the hand of
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and he shall take it
and the Chaldeans that fight against this city shall come
and set fire on this city and burn it with the houses upon
whose roofs they have offered incense unto Baal and poured
out drink offerings unto other gods to provoke me to anger.
for the children of Israel and the children of Judah have only
done evil before me from their youth for the children of
Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work of their
hands saith the lord.
for this city hath been to me as a provocation of mine anger
and of my fury from the day that they built it even unto this
day that I should remove it from before my face
because of all the evil of the children of Israel and of the
children of Judah which they have done to provoke me to
anger they their kings their princes their priests and
their prophets and the men of Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem.
and they have turned unto me the back and not the face
though I taught them rising up early and teaching them yet
they have not hearkened to receive instruction.
but they set their abominations in the house which is called
by my name to defile it.
and they built the high places of Baal which are in the
valley of the son of Hinnom to cause their sons and their
daughters to pass through the fire unto Molech which I
commanded them not Neither came it into my mind that they
should do this abomination to cause Judah to Sin.
and now therefore thus saith the lord the God of Israel
concerning this city whereof ye say it shall be delivered
into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword and by the
famine and by the pestilence
behold I will gather them out of all countries whither I
have driven them in mine anger and in my fury and in great
wrath and I will bring them again unto this place and I will
cause them to dwell safely
and they shall be my people and I will be their God
and I will give them one heart and one way that they may
fear me for ever for the good of them and of their children
after them
and I will make an everlasting covenant with them that I will
not turn away from them to do them good but I will put my
fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me.
yea I will rejoice over them to do them good and I will
plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with
my whole soul.
for thus saith the lord like as I have brought all this great
evil upon this people so will I bring upon them all the good
that I have promised them.
and fields shall be bought in this land whereof ye say it is
desolate without man or beast it is given into the hand of
the Chaldeans.
men shall buy fields for money and subscribe evidences and
seal them and take witnesses in the land of Benjamin and in
the places about Jerusalem and in the cities of Judah and in
the cities of the mountains and in the cities of the valley
and in the cities of the south for I will cause their
captivity to return saith the lord.
moreover the word of the lord came unto Jeremiah the second
time while he was yet shut up in the court of the prison
saying
thus saith the lord the maker thereof the lord that formed
it to establish it the lord is his name
call unto me and I will answer thee and shew thee great and
Mighty things which thou knowest not.
for thus saith the lord the God of Israel concerning the
houses of this city and concerning the houses of the kings of
Judah which are thrown down by the mounts and by the sword
they come to fight with the Chaldeans but it is to fill them
with the dead bodies of men whom I have slain in mine anger
and in my fury and for all whose wickedness I have hid my
face from this city.
behold I will bring it health and cure and I will cure them
and will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth.
and I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of
Israel to return and will build them as at the first.
and I will cleanse them from all their iniquity whereby they
have sinned against me and I will pardon all their
iniquities whereby they have sinned and whereby they have
transgressed against me.
and it shall be to me a name of joy a praise and an honour
before all the nations of the earth which shall hear all the
good that I do unto them and they shall fear and tremble for
all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure
unto it.
thus saith the lord again there shall be heard in this place
which ye say shall be desolate without man and without beast
even in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem
that are desolate without man and without inhabitant and
without beast
the voice of joy and the voice of gladness the voice of the
bridegroom and the voice of the bride the voice of them that
shall say praise the lord of hosts for the lord is good for
his mercy endureth for ever and of them that shall bring the
sacrifice of praise into the house of the lord. for I will
cause to return the captivity of the land as at the first
saith the lord.
thus saith the lord of hosts again in this place which is
desolate without man and without beast and in all the cities
thereof shall be an habitation of shepherds causing their
flocks to lie down.
in the cities of the mountains in the cities of the vale and
in the cities of the south and in the land of Benjamin and
in the places about Jerusalem and in the cities of Judah
shall the flocks pass again under the hands of him that
telleth them saith the lord.
behold the days come saith the lord that I will perform
that good thing which I have promised unto the house of Israel
and to the house of Judah.
in those days and at that time will I cause the branch of
righteousness to grow up unto David and he shall execute
judgment and righteousness in the land.
in those days shall Judah be saved and Jerusalem shall dwell
safely and this is the name wherewith she shall be called
the lord our righteousness.
for thus saith the lord David shall never want a man to sit
upon the throne of the house of Israel
Neither shall the priests the Levites want a man before me to
offer burnt offerings and to kindle meat offerings and to do
sacrifice continually.
and the word of the lord came unto Jeremiah saying
thus saith the lord if ye can break my covenant of the day
and my covenant of the night and that there should not be day
and night in their season
then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant
that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne and
with the Levites the priests my ministers.
as the host of heaven cannot be numbered Neither the sand of
the sea measured so will I multiply the seed of David my
servant and the Levites that minister unto me.
moreover the word of the lord came to Jeremiah saying
considerest thou not what this people have spoken saying the
two families which the lord hath chosen he hath even cast
them off? thus they have despised my people that they should
be no more a nation before them.
thus saith the lord if my covenant be not with day and night
and if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and
earth
then will I cast away the seed of Jacob and David my servant
so that I will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the
seed of Abraham Isaac and Jacob for I will cause their
captivity to return and have mercy on them.
the word which came unto Jeremiah from the lord when
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and all his army and all the
kingdoms of the earth of his dominion and all the people
fought against Jerusalem and against all the cities thereof
saying
thus saith the lord the God of Israel go and speak to
Zedekiah king of Judah and tell him thus saith the lord
behold I will give this city into the hand of the king of
Babylon and he shall burn it with fire
and thou shalt not escape out of his hand but shalt surely be
taken and delivered into his hand and thine eyes shall
behold the eyes of the king of Babylon and he shall speak
with thee mouth to mouth and thou shalt go to Babylon.
yet hear the word of the lord O Zedekiah king of Judah thus
saith the lord of thee thou shalt not die by the sword
but thou shalt die in peace and with the burnings of thy
fathers the former kings which were before thee so shall
they burn odours for thee and they will lament thee saying
ah lord for I have pronounced the word saith the lord.
then Jeremiah the prophet spake all these words unto Zedekiah
king of Judah in Jerusalem
when the king of Babylon s army fought against Jerusalem and
against all the cities of Judah that were left against
Lachish and against Azekah for these defenced cities
remained of the cities of Judah.
this is the word that came unto Jeremiah from the lord after
that the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people
which were at Jerusalem to proclaim liberty unto them
that every man should let his manservant and every man his
maidservant being an Hebrew or an Hebrewess go free that
none should serve himself of them to wit of a Jew his
brother.
now when all the princes and all the people which had
entered into the covenant heard that every one should let his
manservant and every one his maidservant go free that none
should serve themselves of them any more then they obeyed
and let them go.
but afterward they turned and caused the servants and the
handmaids whom they had let go free to return and brought
them into subjection for servants and for handmaids.
therefore the word of the lord came to Jeremiah from the lord
saying
thus saith the lord the God of Israel I made a covenant with
your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the
land of Egypt out of the house of bondmen saying
at the end of seven years let ye go every man his brother an
Hebrew which hath been sold unto thee and when he hath
served thee six years thou shalt let him go free from thee
but your fathers hearkened not unto me Neither inclined their
ear.
and ye were now turned and had done right in my sight in
proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbour and ye had
made a covenant before me in the house which is called by my
name
but ye turned and polluted my name and caused every man his
servant and every man his handmaid whom he had set at
liberty at their pleasure to return and brought them into
subjection to be unto you for servants and for handmaids.
therefore thus saith the lord ye have not hearkened unto me
in proclaiming liberty every one to his brother and every
man to his neighbour behold I proclaim a liberty for you
saith the lord to the sword to the pestilence and to the
famine and I will make you to be removed into all the
kingdoms of the earth.
and I will give the men that have transgressed my covenant
which have not performed the words of the covenant which they
had made before me when they cut the calf in twain and
passed between the parts thereof
the princes of Judah and the princes of Jerusalem the
eunuchs and the priests and all the people of the land
which passed between the parts of the calf
I will even give them into the hand of their enemies and into
the hand of them that seek their life and their dead bodies
shall be for meat unto the fowls of the heaven and to the
beasts of the earth.
and Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes will I give into
the hand of their enemies and into the hand of them that seek
their life and into the hand of the king of Babylon s army
which are gone up from you.
behold I will command saith the lord and cause them to
return to this city and they shall fight against it and take
it and burn it with fire and I will make the cities of Judah
a desolation without an inhabitant.
the word which came unto Jeremiah from the lord in the days of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah saying
go unto the house of the Rechabites and speak unto them and
bring them into the house of the lord into one of the
chambers and give them wine to drink.
then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah the son of
Habaziniah and his brethren and all his sons and the whole
house of the Rechabites
and I brought them into the house of the lord into the
chamber of the sons of Hanan the son of Igdaliah a man of
God which was by the chamber of the princes which was above
the chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum the keeper of the
door
and I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots
full of wine and cups and I said unto them drink ye wine.
but they said we will drink no wine for Jonadab the son of
Rechab our father commanded us saying ye shall drink no
wine Neither ye nor your sons for ever
Neither shall ye build house nor sow seed nor plant
vineyard nor have any but all your days ye shall dwell in
tents that ye may live many days in the land where ye be
strangers.
thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab our
father in all that he hath charged us to drink no wine all
our days we our wives our sons nor our daughters
nor to build houses for us to dwell in Neither have we
vineyard nor field nor seed
but we have dwelt in tents and have obeyed and done
according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.
but it came to pass when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came
up into the land that we said come and let us go to
Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans and for fear
of the army of the Syrians so we dwell at Jerusalem.
then came the word of the lord unto Jeremiah saying
thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel go and tell
the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem will ye not
receive instruction to hearken to my words? saith the lord.
the words of Jonadab the son of Rechab that he commanded his
sons not to drink wine are performed for unto this day they
drink none but obey their father s commandment
notwithstanding I have spoken unto you rising early and
speaking but ye hearkened not unto me.
I have sent also unto you all my servants the prophets rising
up early and sending them saying return ye now every man
from his evil way and amend your doings and go not after
other gods to serve them and ye shall dwell in the land which
I have given to you and to your fathers but ye have not
inclined your ear nor hearkened unto me.
because the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed
the commandment of their father which he commanded them but
this people hath not hearkened unto me
therefore thus saith the lord God of hosts the God of Israel
behold I will bring upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants
of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against them
because I have spoken unto them but they have not heard and
I have called unto them but they have not answered.
and Jeremiah said unto the house of the Rechabites thus saith
the lord of hosts the God of Israel because ye have obeyed
the commandment of Jonadab your father and kept all his
precepts and done according unto all that he hath commanded
you
therefore thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel
Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before
me for ever.
and it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah king of Judah that this word came unto Jeremiah from
the lord saying
take thee a roll of a book and write therein all the words
that I have spoken unto thee against Israel and against
Judah and against all the nations from the day I spake unto
thee from the days of Josiah even unto this day.
it may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which
I purpose to do unto them that they may return every man from
his evil way that I may forgive their iniquity and their Sin.
then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah and Baruch
wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the lord
which he had spoken unto him upon a roll of a book.
and Jeremiah commanded Baruch saying I Am shut up I cannot
go into the house of the lord
therefore go thou and read in the roll which thou hast
written from my mouth the words of the lord in the ears of
the people in the lord s house upon the fasting day and also
thou shalt read them in the ears of all Judah that come out of
their cities.
it may be they will present their supplication before the
lord and will return every one from his evil way for great
is the anger and the fury that the lord hath pronounced
against this people.
and Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that
Jeremiah the prophet commanded him reading in the book the
words of the lord in the lord s house.
and it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah king of Judah in the ninth month that they proclaimed
a fast before the lord to all the people in Jerusalem and to
all the people that came from the cities of Judah unto
Jerusalem.
then read Baruch in the book the words of Jeremiah in the
house of the lord in the chamber of Gemariah the son of
Shaphan the scribe in the higher court at the entry of the
new gate of the lord s house in the ears of all the people.
when Michaiah the son of Gemariah the son of Shaphan had
heard out of the book all the words of the lord
then he went down into the king s house into the scribe s
chamber and lo all the princes sat there even Elishama the
scribe and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah and Elnathan the son
of Achbor and Gemariah the son of Shaphan and Zedekiah the
son of Hananiah and all the princes.
then Michaiah declared unto them all the words that he had
heard when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people.
therefore all the princes sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah
the son of Shelemiah the son of Cushi unto Baruch saying
take in thine hand the roll wherein thou hast read in the ears
of the people and come. so Baruch the son of Neriah took the
roll in his hand and came unto them.
and they said unto him sit down now and read it in our ears.
so Baruch read it in their ears.
now it came to pass when they had heard all the words they
were afraid both one and other and said unto Baruch we will
surely tell the king of all these words.
and they asked Baruch saying tell us now how didst thou
write all these words at his mouth?
then Baruch answered them he pronounced all these words unto
me with his mouth and I wrote them with ink in the book.
then said the princes unto Baruch go hide thee thou and
Jeremiah and let no man know where ye be.
and they went in to the king into the court but they laid up
the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe and told all
the words in the ears of the king.
so the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll and he took it out
of Elishama the scribe s chamber. and Jehudi read it in the
ears of the king and in the ears of all the princes which
stood beside the king.
now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month and
there was a fire on the hearth burning before him.
and it came to pass that when Jehudi had read three or four
leaves he cut it with the penknife and cast it into the fire
that was on the hearth until all the roll was consumed in the
fire that was on the hearth.
yet they were not afraid nor rent their garments Neither the
king nor any of his servants that heard all these words.
nevertheless Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made
intercession to the king that he would not burn the roll but
he would not hear them.
but the king commanded Jerahmeel the son of Hammelech and
Seraiah the son of Azriel and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel to
take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet but the lord
hid them.
then the word of the lord came to Jeremiah after that the
king had burned the roll and the words which Baruch wrote at
the mouth of Jeremiah saying
take thee again another roll and write in it all the former
words that were in the first roll which Jehoiakim the king of
Judah hath burned.
and thou shalt say to Jehoiakim king of Judah thus saith the
lord thou hast burned this roll saying why hast thou
written therein saying the king of Babylon shall certainly
come and destroy this land and shall cause to cease from
thence man and beast?
therefore thus saith the lord of Jehoiakim king of Judah he
shall have none to sit upon the throne of David and his dead
body shall be cast out in the day to the heat and in the
night to the frost.
and I will punish him and his seed and his servants for their
iniquity and I will bring upon them and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem and upon the men of Judah all the evil that I
have pronounced against them but they hearkened not.
then took Jeremiah another roll and gave it to Baruch the
scribe the son of Neriah who wrote therein from the mouth of
Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of
Judah had burned in the fire and there were added besides
unto them many like words.
and king Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned instead of Coniah
the son of Jehoiakim whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made
king in the land of Judah.
but Neither he nor his servants nor the people of the land
did hearken unto the words of the lord which he spake by the
prophet Jeremiah.
and Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and
Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest to the prophet
Jeremiah saying pray now unto the lord our God for us.
now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people for they
had not put him into prison.
then Pharaoh s army was come forth out of Egypt and when the
Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of them they
departed from Jerusalem.
then came the word of the lord unto the prophet Jeremiah
saying
thus saith the lord the God of Israel thus shall ye say to
the king of Judah that sent you unto me to enquire of me
behold Pharaoh s army which is come forth to help you shall
return to Egypt into their own land.
and the Chaldeans shall come again and fight against this
city and take it and burn it with fire.
thus saith the lord deceive not yourselves saying the
Chaldeans shall surely depart from us for they shall not
depart.
for though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that
fight against you and there remained but wounded men among
them yet should they rise up every man in his tent and burn
this city with fire.
and it came to pass that when the army of the Chaldeans was
broken up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh s army
then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land
of Benjamin to separate himself thence in the midst of the
people.
and when he was in the gate of Benjamin a captain of the ward
was there whose name was Irijah the son of Shelemiah the
son of Hananiah and he took Jeremiah the prophet saying
thou fallest away to the Chaldeans.
then said Jeremiah it is false I fall not away to the
Chaldeans. but he hearkened not to him so Irijah took
Jeremiah and brought him to the princes.
wherefore the princes were wroth with Jeremiah and smote him
and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe for
they had made that the prison.
when Jeremiah was entered into the dungeon and into the
cabins and Jeremiah had remained there many days
then Zedekiah the king sent and took him out and the king
asked him secretly in his house and said is there any word
from the lord? and Jeremiah said there is for said he thou
shalt be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon.
moreover Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah what have I
offended against thee or against thy servants or against
this people that ye have put me in prison?
where are now your prophets which prophesied unto you saying
the king of Babylon shall not come against you nor against
this land?
therefore hear now I pray thee O my lord the king let my
supplication I pray thee be accepted before thee that thou
cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe
lest I die there.
then Zedekiah the king commanded that they should commit
Jeremiah into the court of the prison and that they should
give him daily a piece of bread out of the bakers street
until all the bread in the city were spent. thus Jeremiah
remained in the court of the prison.
then Shephatiah the son of Mattan and Gedaliah the son of
Pashur and Jucal the son of Shelemiah and Pashur the son of
Malchiah heard the words that Jeremiah had spoken unto all
the people saying
thus saith the lord he that remaineth in this city shall die
by the sword by the famine and by the pestilence but he
that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live for he shall
have his life for a prey and shall live.
thus saith the lord this city shall surely be given into the
hand of the king of Babylon s army which shall take it.
therefore the princes said unto the king we beseech thee let
this man be put to death for thus he weakeneth the hands of
the men of war that remain in this city and the hands of all
the people in speaking such words unto them for this man
seeketh not the welfare of this people but the hurt.
then Zedekiah the king said behold he is in your hand for
the king is not he that can do any thing against you.
then took they Jeremiah and cast him into the dungeon of
Malchiah the son of Hammelech that was in the court of the
prison and they let down Jeremiah with cords. and in the
dungeon there was no water but mire so Jeremiah sunk in the
mire.
now when Ebedmelech the Ethiopian one of the eunuchs which
was in the king s house heard that they had put Jeremiah in
the dungeon the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin
Ebedmelech went forth out of the king s house and spake to
the king saying
my lord the king these men have done evil in all that they
have done to Jeremiah the prophet whom they have cast into
the dungeon and he is like to die for hunger in the place
where he is for there is no more bread in the city.
then the king commanded Ebedmelech the Ethiopian saying take
from hence thirty men with thee and take up Jeremiah the
prophet out of the dungeon before he die.
so Ebedmelech took the men with him and went into the house
of the king under the treasury and took thence old cast
clouts and old rotten rags and let them down by cords into
the dungeon to Jeremiah.
and Ebedmelech the Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah put now these
old cast clouts and rotten rags under thine armholes under the
cords. and Jeremiah did so.
so they drew up Jeremiah with cords and took him up out of
the dungeon and Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.
then Zedekiah the king sent and took Jeremiah the prophet
unto him into the third entry that is in the house of the
lord and the king said unto Jeremiah I will ask thee a
thing hide nothing from me.
then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah if I declare it unto thee
wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if I give thee
counsel wilt thou not hearken unto me?
so Zedekiah the king sware secretly unto Jeremiah saying as
the lord liveth that made us this soul I will not put thee
to death Neither will I give thee into the hand of these men
that seek thy life.
then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah thus saith the lord the God
of hosts the God of Israel if thou wilt assuredly go forth
unto the king of Babylon s princes then thy soul shall live
and this city shall not be burned with fire and thou shalt
live and thine house
but if thou wilt not go forth to the king of Babylon s
princes then shall this city be given into the hand of the
Chaldeans and they shall burn it with fire and thou shalt
not escape out of their hand.
and Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah I Am afraid of the
Jews that are fallen to the Chaldeans lest they deliver me
into their hand and they mock me.
but Jeremiah said they shall not deliver thee. obey I
beseech thee the voice of the lord which I speak unto thee
so it shall be well unto thee and thy soul shall live.
but if thou refuse to go forth this is the word that the lord
hath shewed me
and behold all the women that are left in the king of
Judah s house shall be brought forth to the king of Babylon s
princes and those women shall say thy friends have set thee
on and have prevailed against thee thy feet are sunk in the
mire and they are turned away back.
so they shall bring out all thy wives and thy children to the
Chaldeans and thou shalt not escape out of their hand but
shalt be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon and thou
shalt cause this city to be burned with fire.
then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah let no man know of these
words and thou shalt not die.
but if the princes hear that I have talked with thee and they
come unto thee and say unto thee declare unto us now what
thou hast said unto the king hide it not from us and we will
not put thee to death also what the king said unto thee
then thou shalt say unto them I presented my supplication
before the king that he would not cause me to return to
Jonathan s house to die there.
then came all the princes unto Jeremiah and asked him and he
told them according to all these words that the king had
commanded. so they left off speaking with him for the matter
was not perceived.
so Jeremiah abode in the court of the prison until the day
that Jerusalem was taken and he was there when Jerusalem was
taken.
in the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah in the tenth
month came Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army
against Jerusalem and they besieged it.
and in the eleventh year of Zedekiah in the fourth month the
ninth day of the month the city was broken up.
and all the princes of the king of Babylon came in and sat in
the middle gate even Nergalsharezer Samgarnebo Sarsechim
Rabsaris Nergalsharezer Rabmag with all the residue of the
princes of the king of Babylon.
and it came to pass that when Zedekiah the king of Judah saw
them and all the men of war then they fled and went forth
out of the city by night by the way of the king s garden by
the gate betwixt the two walls and he went out the way of the
plain.
but the Chaldeans army pursued after them and overtook
Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho and when they had taken
him they brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to
Riblah in the land of Hamath where he gave judgment upon him.
then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah
before his eyes also the king of Babylon slew all the nobles
of Judah.
moreover he put out Zedekiah s eyes and bound him with
chains to carry him to Babylon.
and the Chaldeans burned the king s house and the houses of
the people with fire and brake down the walls of Jerusalem.
then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive
into Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the
city and those that fell away that fell to him with the
rest of the people that remained.
but Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of
the people which had nothing in the land of Judah and gave
them vineyards and fields at the same time.
now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning
Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard saying
take him and look well to him and do him no harm but do
unto him even as he shall say unto thee.
so Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent and Nebushasban
Rabsaris and Nergalsharezer Rabmag and all the king of
Babylon s princes
even they sent and took Jeremiah out of the court of the
prison and committed him unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the
son of Shaphan that he should carry him home so he dwelt
among the people.
now the word of the lord came unto Jeremiah while he was shut
up in the court of the prison saying
go and speak to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian saying thus saith
the lord of hosts the God of Israel behold I will bring my
words upon this city for evil and not for good and they
shall be accomplished in that day before thee.
but I will deliver thee in that day saith the lord and thou
shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art
afraid.
for I will surely deliver thee and thou shalt not fall by the
sword but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee because
thou hast put thy trust in me saith the lord.
the word that came to Jeremiah from the lord after that
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from
Ramah when he had taken him being bound in chains among all
that were carried away captive of Jerusalem and Judah which
were carried away captive unto Babylon.
and the captain of the guard took Jeremiah and said unto him
the lord thy God hath pronounced this evil upon this place.
now the lord hath brought it and done according as he hath
said because ye have sinned against the lord and have not
obeyed his voice therefore this thing is come upon you.
and now behold I loose thee this day from the chains which
were upon thine hand. if it seem good unto thee to come with
me into Babylon come and I will look well unto thee but if
it seem ill unto thee to come with me into Babylon forbear
behold all the land is before thee whither it seemeth good
and convenient for thee to go thither go.
now while he was not yet gone back he said go back also to
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan whom the king
of Babylon hath made Governor over the cities of Judah and
dwell with him among the people or go wheresoever it seemeth
convenient unto thee to go. so the captain of the guard gave
him victuals and a reward and let him go.
then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah
and dwelt with him among the people that were left in the
land.
now when all the captains of the forces which were in the
fields even they and their men heard that the king of
Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam Governor in the
land and had committed unto him men and women and children
and of the poor of the land of them that were not carried
away captive to Babylon
then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah even Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah and
Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth and the sons of Ephai the
Netophathite and Jezaniah the son of a Maachathite they and
their men.
and Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan sware unto
them and to their men saying fear not to serve the
Chaldeans dwell in the land and serve the king of Babylon
and it shall be well with you.
as for me behold I will dwell at Mizpah to serve the
Chaldeans which will come unto us but ye gather ye wine
and summer fruits and oil and put them in your vessels and
dwell in your cities that ye have taken.
likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab and among the
Ammonites and in Edom and that were in all the countries
heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah
and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the
son of Shaphan
even all the Jews returned out of all places whither they were
driven and came to the land of Judah to Gedaliah unto
Mizpah and gathered wine and summer fruits very Much.
moreover Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of
the forces that were in the fields came to Gedaliah to
Mizpah
and said unto him dost thou certainly know that Baalis the
king of the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah
to slay thee? but Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them
not.
then Johanan the son of Kareah spake to Gedaliah in Mizpah
secretly saying let me go I pray thee and I will slay
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah and no man shall know it
wherefore should he slay thee that all the Jews which are
gathered unto thee should be scattered and the remnant in
Judah perish?
but Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said unto Johanan the son of
Kareah thou shalt not do this thing for thou speakest
falsely of Ishmael.
now it came to pass in the seventh month that Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah the son of Elishama of the seed royal and the
princes of the king even Ten men with him came unto Gedaliah
the son of Ahikam to Mizpah and there they did eat bread
together in Mizpah.
then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah and the Ten men that
were with him and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan with the sword and slew him whom the king of Babylon
had made Governor over the land.
Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him even with
Gedaliah at Mizpah and the Chaldeans that were found there
and the men of war.
and it came to pass the second day after he had slain
Gedaliah and no man knew it
that there came certain from Shechem from Shiloh and from
Samaria even fourscore men having their beards shaven and
their clothes rent and having cut themselves with offerings
and incense in their hand to bring them to the house of the
lord.
and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to
meet them weeping all along as he went and it came to pass
as he met them he said unto them come to Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam.
and it was so when they came into the midst of the city that
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them and cast them into the
midst of the pit he and the men that were with him.
but Ten men were found among them that said unto Ishmael slay
us not for we have treasures in the field of wheat and of
barley and of oil and of honey. so he forbare and slew them
not among their brethren.
now the pit wherein Ishmael had cast all the dead bodies of
the men whom he had slain because of Gedaliah was it which
Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel and
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with them that were
slain.
then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the
people that were in Mizpah even the king s daughters and all
the people that remained in Mizpah whom Nebuzaradan the
captain of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away
captive and departed to go over to the Ammonites.
but when Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of
the forces that were with him heard of all the evil that
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done
then they took all the men and went to fight with Ishmael the
son of Nethaniah and found him by the great waters that are
in Gibeon.
now it came to pass that when all the people which were with
Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of
the forces that were with him then they were glad.
so all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from
Mizpah cast about and returned and went unto Johanan the son
of Kareah.
but Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with
eight men and went to the Ammonites.
then took Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of
the forces that were with him all the remnant of the people
whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah from
Mizpah after that he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam
even Mighty men of war and the women and the children and
the eunuchs whom he had brought again from Gibeon
and they departed and dwelt in the habitation of Chimham
which is by Bethlehem to go to enter into Egypt
because of the Chaldeans for they were afraid of them
because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the
son of Ahikam whom the king of Babylon made Governor in the
land.
then all the captains of the forces and Johanan the son of
Kareah and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah and all the people
from the least even unto the greatest came near
and said unto Jeremiah the prophet let we beseech thee our
supplication be accepted before thee and pray for us unto the
lord thy God even for all this remnant for we are left but
a few of many as thine eyes do behold us
that the lord thy God may shew us the way wherein we may walk
and the thing that we may do.
then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them I have heard you
behold I will pray unto the lord your God according to your
words and it shall come to pass that whatsoever thing the
lord shall answer you I will declare it unto you I will keep
nothing back from you.
then they said to Jeremiah the lord be a true and faithful
witness between us if we do not even according to all things
for the which the lord thy God shall send thee to us.
whether it be good or whether it be evil we will obey the
voice of the lord our God to whom we send thee that it may
be well with us when we obey the voice of the lord our God.
and it came to pass after Ten days that the word of the lord
came unto Jeremiah.
then called he Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains
of the forces which were with him and all the people from the
least even to the greatest
and said unto them thus saith the lord the God of Israel
unto whom ye sent me to present your supplication before him
if ye will still abide in this land then will I build you
and not pull you down and I will plant you and not pluck you
up for I repent me of the evil that I have done unto you.
be not afraid of the king of Babylon of whom ye are afraid
be not afraid of him saith the lord for I Am with you to
save you and to deliver you from his hand.
and I will shew mercies unto you that he may have mercy upon
you and cause you to return to your own land.
but if ye say we will not dwell in this land Neither obey
the voice of the lord your God
saying no but we will go into the land of Egypt where we
shall see no war nor hear the sound of the trumpet nor have
hunger of bread and there will we dwell
and now therefore hear the word of the lord ye remnant of
Judah thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel if ye
wholly set your faces to enter into Egypt and go to Sojourn
there
then it shall come to pass that the sword which ye feared
shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt and the famine
whereof ye were afraid shall follow close after you there in
Egypt and there ye shall die.
so shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go
into Egypt to Sojourn there they shall die by the sword by
the famine and by the pestilence and none of them shall
remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.
for thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel as mine
anger and my fury hath been poured forth upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem so shall my fury be poured forth upon you when
ye shall enter into Egypt and ye shall be an execration and
an astonishment and a curse and a reproach and ye shall see
this place no more.
the lord hath said concerning you O ye remnant of Judah go
ye not into Egypt know certainly that I have admonished you
this day.
for ye dissembled in your hearts when ye sent me unto the
lord your God saying pray for us unto the lord our God and
according unto all that the lord our God shall say so declare
unto us and we will do it.
and now I have this day declared it to you but ye have not
obeyed the voice of the lord your God nor any thing for the
which he hath sent me unto you.
now therefore know certainly that ye shall die by the sword
by the famine and by the pestilence in the place whither ye
desire to go and to Sojourn.
and it came to pass that when Jeremiah had made an end of
speaking unto all the people all the words of the lord their
God for which the lord their God had sent him to them even
all these words
then spake Azariah the son of Hoshaiah and Johanan the son of
Kareah and all the proud men saying unto Jeremiah thou
speakest falsely the lord our God hath not sent thee to say
go not into Egypt to Sojourn there
but Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee on against us for
to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans that they might
put us to death and carry us away captives into Babylon.
so Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of the
forces and all the people obeyed not the voice of the lord
to dwell in the land of Judah.
but Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of the
forces took all the remnant of Judah that were returned from
all nations whither they had been driven to dwell in the
land of Judah
even men and women and children and the king s daughters
and every person that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had
left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan and
Jeremiah the prophet and Baruch the son of Neriah.
so they came into the land of Egypt for they obeyed not the
voice of the lord thus came they even to Tahpanhes.
then came the word of the lord unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes
saying
take great stones in thine hand and hide them in the clay in
the brickkiln which is at the entry of Pharaoh s house in
Tahpanhes in the sight of the men of Judah
and say unto them thus saith the lord of hosts the God of
Israel behold I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar the king
of Babylon my servant and will set his throne upon these
stones that I have hid and he shall spread his royal pavilion
over them.
and when he cometh he shall smite the land of Egypt and
deliver such as are for death to death and such as are for
captivity to captivity and such as are for the sword to the
sword.
and I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt
and he shall burn them and carry them away captives and he
shall array himself with the land of Egypt as a Shepherd
putteth on his garment and he shall go forth from thence in
peace.
he shall break also the images of Bethshemesh that is in the
land of Egypt and the houses of the gods of the Egyptians
shall he burn with fire.
the word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews which
dwell in the land of Egypt which dwell at Migdol and at
Tahpanhes and at Noph and in the country of Pathros saying
thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel ye have seen
all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem and upon all
the cities of Judah and behold this day they are a
desolation and no man dwelleth therein
because of their wickedness which they have committed to
provoke me to anger in that they went to burn incense and to
serve other gods whom they knew not Neither they ye nor
your fathers.
howbeit I sent unto you all my servants the prophets rising
early and sending them saying oh do not this abominable
thing that I hate.
but they hearkened not nor inclined their ear to turn from
their wickedness to burn no incense unto other gods.
wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth and was
kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of
Jerusalem and they are wasted and desolate as at this day.
therefore now thus saith the lord the God of hosts the God
of Israel wherefore commit ye this great evil against your
souls to cut off from you man and woman child and suckling
out of Judah to leave you none to remain
in that ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your hands
burning incense unto other gods in the land of Egypt whither
ye be gone to dwell that ye might cut yourselves off and
that ye might be a curse and a reproach among all the nations
of the earth?
have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers and the
wickedness of the kings of Judah and the wickedness of their
wives and your own wickedness and the wickedness of your
wives which they have committed in the land of Judah and in
the streets of Jerusalem?
they are not humbled even unto this day Neither have they
feared nor walked in my law nor in my statutes that I set
before you and before your fathers.
therefore thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel
behold I will set my face against you for evil and to cut
off all Judah.
and I will take the remnant of Judah that have set their
faces to go into the land of Egypt to Sojourn there and they
shall all be consumed and fall in the land of Egypt they
shall even be consumed by the sword and by the famine they
shall die from the least even unto the greatest by the sword
and by the famine and they shall be an execration and an
astonishment and a curse and a reproach.
for I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt as I
have punished Jerusalem by the sword by the famine and by
the pestilence
so that none of the remnant of Judah which are gone into the
land of Egypt to Sojourn there shall escape or remain that
they should return into the land of Judah to the which they
have a desire to return to dwell there for none shall return
but such as shall escape.
then all the men which knew that their wives had burned
incense unto other gods and all the women that stood by a
great multitude even all the people that dwelt in the land of
Egypt in Pathros answered Jeremiah saying
as for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of
the lord we will not hearken unto thee.
but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of
our own mouth to burn incense unto the queen of heaven and
to pour out drink offerings unto her as we have done we and
our fathers our kings and our princes in the cities of
Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem for then had we plenty
of victuals and were well and saw no evil.
but since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven
and to pour out drink offerings unto her we have wanted all
things and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.
and when we burned incense to the queen of heaven and poured
out drink offerings unto her did we make her cakes to worship
her and pour out drink offerings unto her without our men?
then Jeremiah said unto all the people to the men and to the
women and to all the people which had given him that answer
saying
the incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah and in the
streets of Jerusalem ye and your fathers your kings and
your princes and the people of the land did not the lord
remember them and came it not into his mind?
so that the lord could no longer bear because of the evil of
your doings and because of the abominations which ye have
committed therefore is your land a desolation and an
astonishment and a curse without an inhabitant as at this
day.
because ye have burned incense and because ye have sinned
against the lord and have not obeyed the voice of the lord
nor walked in his law nor in his statutes nor in his
testimonies therefore this evil is happened unto you as at
this day.
moreover Jeremiah said unto all the people and to all the
women hear the word of the lord all Judah that are in the
land of Egypt
thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel saying ye
and your wives have both spoken with your mouths and
fulfilled with your hand saying we will surely perform our
vows that we have vowed to burn incense to the queen of
heaven and to pour out drink offerings unto her ye will
surely accomplish your vows and surely perform your vows.
therefore hear ye the word of the lord all Judah that dwell
in the land of Egypt behold I have sworn by my great name
saith the lord that my name shall no more be named in the
mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt saying
the lord God liveth.
behold I will watch over them for evil and not for good and
all the men of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be
consumed by the sword and by the famine until there be an end
of them.
yet a small number that escape the sword shall return out of
the land of Egypt into the land of Judah and all the remnant
of Judah that are gone into the land of Egypt to Sojourn
there shall know whose words shall stand mine or their s.
and this shall be a sign unto you saith the lord that I will
punish you in this place that ye may know that my words shall
surely stand against you for evil
thus saith the lord behold I will give Pharaohhophra king of
Egypt into the hand of his enemies and into the hand of them
that seek his life as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the
hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon his enemy and that
sought his life.
the word that Jeremiah the prophet spake unto Baruch the son
of Neriah when he had written these words in a book at the
mouth of Jeremiah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah king of Judah saying
thus saith the lord the God of Israel unto thee O Baruch
thou didst say woe is me now for the lord hath added grief
to my sorrow I fainted in my sighing and I find no rest.
thus shalt thou say unto him the lord saith thus behold
that which I have built will I break down and that which I
have planted I will pluck up even this whole land.
and seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not for
behold I will bring evil upon all flesh saith the lord but
thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all places
whither thou goest.
the word of the lord which came to Jeremiah the prophet
against the Gentiles
against Egypt against the army of Pharaohnecho king of Egypt
which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish which
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah.
order ye the buckler and shield and draw near to battle.
harness the horses and get up ye horsemen and stand forth
with your helmets furbish the spears and put on the
brigandines.
wherefore have I seen them dismayed and turned away back? and
their Mighty ones are beaten down and are fled apace and
look not back for fear was round about saith the lord.
let not the swift flee away nor the Mighty man escape they
shall stumble and fall toward the north by the river
Euphrates.
who is this that cometh up as a flood whose waters are moved
as the rivers?
Egypt riseth up like a flood and his waters are moved like
the rivers and he saith I will go up and will cover the
earth I will destroy the city and the inhabitants thereof.
come up ye horses and rage ye chariots and let the Mighty
men come forth the Ethiopians and the Libyans that handle
the shield and the Lydians that handle and bend the bow.
for this is the day of the lord God of hosts a day of
vengeance that he may avenge him of his adversaries and the
sword shall devour and it shall be satiate and made drunk
with their blood for the lord God of hosts hath a sacrifice
in the north country by the river Euphrates.
go up into Gilead and take balm O virgin the daughter of
Egypt in vain shalt thou use many medicines for thou shalt
not be cured.
the nations have heard of thy shame and thy cry hath filled
the land for the Mighty man hath stumbled against the Mighty
and they are fallen both together.
the word that the lord spake to Jeremiah the prophet how
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come and smite the land
of Egypt.
declare ye in Egypt and publish in Migdol and publish in
Noph and in Tahpanhes say ye stand fast and prepare thee
for the sword shall devour round about thee.
why are thy valiant men swept away? they stood not because
the lord did drive them.
he made many to fall yea one fell upon another and they
said Arise and let us go again to our own people and to the
land of our nativity from the oppressing sword.
they did cry there Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise he
hath passed the time appointed.
as I live saith the king whose name is the lord of hosts
surely as Tabor is among the mountains and as Carmel by the
sea so shall he come.
O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt furnish thyself to go into
captivity for Noph shall be waste and desolate without an
inhabitant.
Egypt is like a very fair heifer but destruction cometh it
cometh out of the north.
also her hired men are in the midst of her like fatted
bullocks for they also are turned back and are fled away
together they did not stand because the day of their
calamity was come upon them and the time of their visitation.
the voice thereof shall go like a serpent for they shall
march with an army and come against her with axes as hewers
of wood.
they shall cut down her forest saith the lord though it
cannot be searched because they are more than the
grasshoppers and are innumerable.
the daughter of Egypt shall be confounded she shall be
delivered into the hand of the people of the north.
the lord of hosts the God of Israel saith behold I will
punish the multitude of no and Pharaoh and Egypt with their
gods and their kings even Pharaoh and all them that trust
in him
and I will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their
lives and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon
and into the hand of his servants and afterward it shall be
inhabited as in the days of old saith the lord.
but fear not thou O my servant Jacob and be not dismayed O
Israel for behold I will save thee from afar off and thy
seed from the land of their captivity and Jacob shall return
and be in rest and at ease and none shall make him afraid.
fear thou not O Jacob my servant saith the lord for I Am
with thee for I will make a full end of all the nations
whither I have driven thee but I will not make a full end of
thee but correct thee in measure yet will I not leave thee
wholly unpunished.
the word of the lord that came to Jeremiah the prophet against
the Philistines before that Pharaoh smote Gaza.
thus saith the lord behold waters rise up out of the north
and shall be an overflowing flood and shall overflow the
land and all that is therein the city and them that dwell
therein then the men shall cry and all the inhabitants of
the land shall howl.
at the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong
horses at the rushing of his chariots and at the rumbling of
his wheels the fathers shall not look back to their children
for feebleness of hands
because of the day that cometh to spoil all the Philistines
and to cut off from Tyrus and Zidon every helper that
remaineth for the lord will spoil the Philistines the
remnant of the country of Caphtor.
baldness is come upon Gaza Ashkelon is cut off with the
remnant of their valley how long wilt thou cut thyself?
O thou sword of the lord how long will it be ere thou be
quiet? put up thyself into thy scabbard rest and be still.
how can it be quiet seeing the lord hath given it a charge
against Ashkelon and against the sea shore? there hath he
appointed it.
against Moab thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel
woe unto Nebo for it is spoiled Kiriathaim is confounded and
taken Misgab is confounded and dismayed.
there shall be no more praise of Moab in Heshbon they have
devised evil against it come and let us cut it off from
being a nation. also thou shalt be cut down O Madmen the
sword shall pursue thee.
a voice of crying shall be from Horonaim spoiling and great
destruction.
Moab is destroyed her little ones have caused a cry to be
heard.
for in the going up of Luhith continual weeping shall go up
for in the going down of Horonaim the enemies have heard a cry
of destruction.
flee save your lives and be like the heath in the
wilderness.
for because thou hast trusted in thy works and in thy
treasures thou shalt also be taken and Chemosh shall go
forth into captivity with his priests and his princes
together.
and the spoiler shall come upon every city and no city shall
escape the valley also shall perish and the plain shall be
destroyed as the lord hath spoken.
give wings unto Moab that it may flee and get away for the
cities thereof shall be desolate without any to dwell
therein.
cursed be he that doeth the work of the lord deceitfully and
cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood.
Moab hath been at ease from his youth and he hath settled on
his lees and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel
Neither hath he gone into captivity therefore his taste
remained in him and his scent is not changed.
therefore behold the days come saith the lord that I will
send unto him wanderers that shall cause him to wander and
shall empty his vessels and break their bottles.
and Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh as the house of Israel
was ashamed of Bethel their confidence.
how say ye we are Mighty and strong men for the war?
Moab is spoiled and gone up out of her cities and his chosen
young men are gone down to the slaughter saith the king
whose name is the lord of hosts.
the calamity of Moab is near to come and his affliction
hasteth fast.
all ye that are about him bemoan him and all ye that know
his name say how is the strong staff broken and the
beautiful rod
thou daughter that dost inhabit Dibon come down from thy
glory and sit in thirst for the spoiler of Moab shall come
upon thee and he shall destroy thy strong holds.
O inhabitant of Aroer stand by the way and espy ask him
that fleeth and her that escapeth and say what is done?
Moab is confounded for it is broken down howl and cry tell
ye it in Arnon that Moab is spoiled
and judgment is come upon the plain country upon Holon and
upon Jahazah and upon Mephaath
and upon Dibon and upon Nebo and upon Bethdiblathaim
and upon Kiriathaim and upon Bethgamul and upon Bethmeon
and upon Kerioth and upon Bozrah and upon all the cities of
the land of Moab far or near.
the horn of Moab is cut off and his arm is broken saith the
lord.
make ye him drunken for he magnified himself against the
lord Moab also shall wallow in his vomit and he also shall
be in derision.
for was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among
thieves? for since thou spakest of him thou skippedst for
joy.
O ye that dwell in Moab leave the cities and dwell in the
rock and be like the dove that maketh her nest in the sides
of the hole s mouth.
we have heard the pride of Moab he is exceeding proud his
loftiness and his arrogancy and his pride and the
haughtiness of his heart.
I know his wrath saith the lord but it shall not be so his
lies shall not so effect it.
therefore will I howl for Moab and I will cry out for all
Moab mine heart shall mourn for the men of Kirheres.
O vine of Sibmah I will weep for thee with the weeping of
Jazer thy plants are gone over the sea they reach even to
the sea of Jazer the spoiler is fallen upon thy summer fruits
and upon thy vintage.
and joy and gladness is taken from the plentiful field and
from the land of Moab and I have caused wine to fail from the
winepresses none shall tread with shouting their shouting
shall be no shouting.
from the cry of Heshbon even unto Elealeh and even unto
Jahaz have they uttered their voice from Zoar even unto
Horonaim as an heifer of three years old for the waters also
of Nimrim shall be desolate.
moreover I will cause to cease in Moab saith the lord him
that offereth in the high places and him that burneth incense
to his gods.
therefore mine heart shall sound for Moab like pipes and mine
heart shall sound like pipes for the men of Kirheres because
the Riches that he hath gotten are perished.
for every head shall be bald and every beard clipped upon
all the hands shall be cuttings and upon the loins sackcloth.
there shall be lamentation generally upon all the housetops of
Moab and in the streets thereof for I have broken Moab like
a vessel wherein is no pleasure saith the lord.
they shall howl saying how is it broken down how hath Moab
turned the back with shame so shall Moab be a derision and a
dismaying to all them about him.
for thus saith the lord behold he shall fly as an eagle and
shall spread his wings over Moab.
Kerioth is taken and the strong holds are surprised and the
Mighty men s hearts in Moab at that day shall be as the heart
of a woman in her pangs.
and Moab shall be destroyed from being a people because he
hath magnified himself against the lord.
fear and the pit and the snare shall be upon thee O
inhabitant of Moab saith the lord.
he that fleeth from the fear shall fall into the pit and he
that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare
for I will bring upon it even upon Moab the year of their
visitation saith the lord.
they that fled stood under the shadow of Heshbon because of
the force but a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon and a
flame from the midst of Sihon and shall devour the corner of
Moab and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.
woe be unto thee O Moab the people of Chemosh perisheth for
thy sons are taken captives and thy daughters captives.
yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab in the latter
days saith the lord. thus far is the judgment of Moab.
concerning the Ammonites thus saith the lord hath Israel no
sons? hath he no heir? why then doth their king inherit Gad
and his people dwell in his cities?
therefore behold the days come saith the lord that I will
cause an alarm of war to be heard in Rabbah of the Ammonites
and it shall be a desolate heap and her daughters shall be
burned with fire then shall Israel be heir unto them that
were his heirs saith the lord.
howl O Heshbon for Ai is spoiled cry ye daughters of
Rabbah gird you with sackcloth lament and run to and fro by
the hedges for their king shall go into captivity and his
priests and his princes together.
wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys thy flowing valley O
backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures saying
who shall come unto me?
behold I will bring a fear upon thee saith the lord God of
hosts from all those that be about thee and ye shall be
driven out every man right forth and none shall gather up him
that wandereth.
and afterward I will bring again the captivity of the children
of Ammon saith the lord.
concerning Edom thus saith the lord of hosts is wisdom no
more in Teman? is counsel perished from the prudent? is their
wisdom vanished?
flee ye turn back dwell deep O inhabitants of Dedan for I
will bring the calamity of Esau upon him the time that I will
visit him.
if grapegatherers come to thee would they not leave some
gleaning grapes? if thieves by night they will destroy till
they have enough.
but I have made Esau bare I have uncovered his secret places
and he shall not be able to hide himself his seed is spoiled
and his brethren and his neighbours and he is not.
leave thy fatherless children I will preserve them alive and
let thy widows trust in me.
for thus saith the lord behold they whose judgment was not
to drink of the cup have assuredly drunken and art thou he
that shall altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go
unpunished but thou shalt surely drink of it.
for I have sworn by myself saith the lord that Bozrah shall
become a desolation a reproach a waste and a curse and all
the cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes.
I have heard a rumour from the lord and an ambassador is sent
unto the heathen saying gather ye together and come against
her and rise up to the battle.
for lo I will make thee small among the heathen and
despised among men.
thy terribleness hath deceived thee and the pride of thine
heart O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock that
holdest the height of the hill though thou shouldest make thy
nest as high as the eagle I will bring thee down from thence
saith the lord.
also Edom shall be a desolation every one that goeth by it
shall be astonished and shall hiss at all the plagues
thereof.
as in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour
cities thereof saith the lord no man shall abide there
Neither shall a son of man dwell in it.
behold he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of
Jordan against the habitation of the strong but I will
suddenly make him run away from her and who is a chosen man
that I may appoint over her? for who is like me? and who will
appoint me the time? and who is that Shepherd that will stand
before me?
therefore hear the counsel of the lord that he hath taken
against Edom and his purposes that he hath purposed against
the inhabitants of Teman surely the least of the flock shall
draw them out surely he shall make their habitations desolate
with them.
the earth is moved at the noise of their fall at the cry the
noise thereof was heard in the red sea.
behold he shall come up and fly as the eagle and spread his
wings over Bozrah and at that day shall the heart of the
Mighty men of Edom be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.
concerning Damascus. Hamath is confounded and Arpad for they
have heard evil tidings they are fainthearted there is
sorrow on the sea it cannot be quiet.
Damascus is waxed feeble and turneth herself to flee and
fear hath seized on her anguish and sorrows have taken her
as a woman in travail.
how is the city of praise not left the city of my joy
therefore her young men shall fall in her streets and all the
men of war shall be cut off in that day saith the lord of
hosts.
and I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus and it shall
consume the palaces of Benhadad.
concerning Kedar and concerning the kingdoms of Hazor which
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon shall smite thus saith the
lord Arise ye go up to Kedar and spoil the men of the east.
their tents and their flocks shall they take away they shall
take to themselves their curtains and all their vessels and
their camels and they shall cry unto them fear is on every
side.
flee get you far off dwell deep O ye inhabitants of Hazor
saith the lord for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath taken
counsel against you and hath conceived a purpose against you.
Arise get you up unto the wealthy nation that dwelleth
without care saith the lord which have Neither gates nor
bars which dwell alone.
and their camels shall be a booty and the multitude of their
cattle a spoil and I will scatter into all winds them that
are in the utmost corners and I will bring their calamity
from all sides thereof saith the lord.
and Hazor shall be a dwelling for dragons and a desolation
for ever there shall no man abide there nor any son of man
dwell in it.
the word of the lord that came to Jeremiah the prophet against
Elam in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah
saying
thus saith the lord of hosts behold I will break the bow of
Elam the chief of their might.
and upon Elam will I bring the four winds from the four
quarters of heaven and will scatter them toward all those
winds and there shall be no nation whither the outcasts of
Elam shall not come.
for I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies and
before them that seek their life and I will bring evil upon
them even my fierce anger saith the lord and I will send
the sword after them till I have consumed them
and I will set my throne in Elam and will destroy from thence
the king and the princes saith the lord.
but it shall come to pass in the latter days that I will
bring again the captivity of Elam saith the lord.
the word that the lord spake against Babylon and against the
land of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet.
declare ye among the nations and publish and set up a
standard publish and conceal not say Babylon is taken Bel
is confounded Merodach is broken in pieces her idols are
confounded her images are broken in pieces.
for out of the north there cometh up a nation against her
which shall make her land desolate and none shall dwell
therein they shall remove they shall depart both man and
beast.
in those days and in that time saith the lord the children
of Israel shall come they and the children of Judah together
going and weeping they shall go and seek the lord their God.
they shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward
saying come and let us join ourselves to the lord in a
perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten.
my people hath been lost sheep their shepherds have caused
them to go astray they have turned them away on the
mountains they have gone from mountain to hill they have
forgotten their restingplace.
all that found them have devoured them and their adversaries
said we offend not because they have sinned against the
lord the habitation of justice even the lord the hope of
their fathers.
remove out of the midst of Babylon and go forth out of the
land of the Chaldeans and be as the he goats before the
flocks.
for lo I will raise and cause to come up against Babylon an
assembly of great nations from the north country and they
shall set themselves in array against her from thence she
shall be taken their arrows shall be as of a Mighty expert
man none shall return in vain.
and Chaldea shall be a spoil all that spoil her shall be
satisfied saith the lord.
because ye were glad because ye rejoiced O ye destroyers of
mine heritage because ye are grown fat as the heifer at
grass and bellow as bulls
your mother shall be sore confounded she that bare you shall
be ashamed behold the hindermost of the nations shall be a
wilderness a dry land and a desert.
because of the wrath of the lord it shall not be inhabited
but it shall be wholly desolate every one that goeth by
Babylon shall be astonished and hiss at all her plagues.
put yourselves in array against Babylon round about all ye
that bend the bow shoot at her spare no arrows for she hath
sinned against the lord.
shout against her round about she hath given her hand her
foundations are fallen her walls are thrown down for it is
the vengeance of the lord take vengeance upon her as she
hath done do unto her.
cut off the sower from Babylon and him that handleth the
sickle in the time of harvest for fear of the oppressing
sword they shall turn every one to his people and they shall
flee every one to his own land.
Israel is a scattered sheep the lions have driven him away
first the king of Assyria hath devoured him and last this
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath broken his bones.
therefore thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel
behold I will punish the king of Babylon and his land as I
have punished the king of Assyria.
and I will bring Israel again to his habitation and he shall
feed on Carmel and Bashan and his soul shall be satisfied
upon mount Ephraim and Gilead.
in those days and in that time saith the lord the iniquity
of Israel shall be sought for and there shall be none and
the sins of Judah and they shall not be found for I will
pardon them whom I reserve.
go up against the land of Merathaim even against it and
against the inhabitants of Pekod waste and utterly destroy
after them saith the lord and do according to all that I
have commanded thee.
a sound of battle is in the land and of great destruction.
how is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken
how is Babylon become a desolation among the nations
I have laid a snare for thee and thou art also taken O
Babylon and thou wast not aware thou art found and also
caught because thou hast striven against the lord.
the lord hath opened his armoury and hath brought forth the
weapons of his indignation for this is the work of the lord
God of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans.
come against her from the utmost border open her storehouses
cast her up as heaps and destroy her utterly let nothing of
her be left.
slay all her bullocks let them go down to the slaughter woe
unto them for their day is come the time of their
visitation.
the voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of
Babylon to declare in Zion the vengeance of the lord our God
the vengeance of his temple.
call together the archers against Babylon all ye that bend
the bow camp against it round about let none thereof escape
recompense her according to her work according to all that
she hath done do unto her for she hath been proud against
the lord against the holy one of Israel.
therefore shall her young men fall in the streets and all her
men of war shall be cut off in that day saith the lord.
behold I Am against thee O thou most proud saith the lord
God of hosts for thy day is come the time that I will visit
thee.
and the most proud shall stumble and fall and none shall
raise him up and I will kindle a fire in his cities and it
shall devour all round about him.
thus saith the lord of hosts the children of Israel and the
children of Judah were oppressed together and all that took
them captives held them fast they refused to let them go.
their redeemer is strong the lord of hosts is his name he
shall throughly plead their cause that he may give rest to
the land and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.
a sword is upon the Chaldeans saith the lord and upon the
inhabitants of Babylon and upon her princes and upon her
wise men.
a sword is upon the liars and they shall dote a sword is
upon her Mighty men and they shall be dismayed.
a sword is upon their horses and upon their chariots and
upon all the mingled people that are in the midst of her and
they shall become as women a sword is upon her treasures and
they shall be robbed.
a drought is upon her waters and they shall be dried up for
it is the land of graven images and they are mad upon their
idols.
therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wild beasts
of the islands shall dwell there and the owls shall dwell
therein and it shall be no more inhabited for ever Neither
shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation.
as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities
thereof saith the lord so shall no man abide there Neither
shall any son of man dwell therein.
behold a people shall come from the north and a great
nation and many kings shall be raised up from the coasts of
the earth.
they shall hold the bow and the lance they are cruel and
will not shew mercy their voice shall roar like the sea and
they shall ride upon horses every one put in array like a
man to the battle against thee O daughter of Babylon.
the king of Babylon hath heard the report of them and his
hands waxed feeble anguish took hold of him and pangs as of
a woman in travail.
behold he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of
Jordan unto the habitation of the strong but I will make them
suddenly run away from her and who is a chosen man that I
may appoint over her? for who is like me? and who will appoint
me the time? and who is that Shepherd that will stand before
me?
therefore hear ye the counsel of the lord that he hath taken
against Babylon and his purposes that he hath purposed
against the land of the Chaldeans surely the least of the
flock shall draw them out surely he shall make their
habitation desolate with them.
at the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth is moved and
the cry is heard among the nations.
thus saith the lord behold I will raise up against Babylon
and against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up
against me a destroying wind
and will send unto Babylon fanners that shall fan her and
shall empty her land for in the day of trouble they shall be
against her round about.
against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow and
against him that lifteth himself up in his brigandine and
spare ye not her young men destroy ye utterly all her host.
thus the slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans and
they that are thrust through in her streets.
for Israel hath not been forsaken nor Judah of his God of
the lord of hosts though their land was filled with Sin
against the holy one of Israel.
flee out of the midst of Babylon and deliver every man his
soul be not cut off in her iniquity for this is the time of
the lord s vengeance he will render unto her a recompence.
Babylon hath been a golden cup in the lord s hand that made
all the earth drunken the nations have drunken of her wine
therefore the nations are mad.
Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed howl for her take
balm for her pain if so be she may be healed.
we would have healed Babylon but she is not healed forsake
her and let us go every one into his own country for her
judgment reacheth unto heaven and is lifted up even to the
skies.
the lord hath brought forth our righteousness come and let
us declare in Zion the work of the lord our God.
make bright the arrows gather the shields the lord hath
raised up the spirit of the kings of the Medes for his device
is against Babylon to destroy it because it is the vengeance
of the lord the vengeance of his temple.
set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon make the watch
strong set up the watchmen prepare the ambushes for the
lord hath both devised and done that which he spake against
the inhabitants of Babylon.
O thou that dwellest upon many waters abundant in treasures
thine end is come and the measure of thy covetousness.
the lord of hosts hath sworn by himself saying surely I will
fill thee with men as with caterpillers and they shall lift
up a shout against thee.
he hath made the earth by his power he hath established the
world by his wisdom and hath stretched out the heaven by his
understanding.
when he uttereth his voice there is a multitude of waters in
the heavens and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the
ends of the earth he maketh lightnings with rain and
bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.
every man is brutish by his knowledge every founder is
confounded by the graven image for his molten image is
falsehood and there is no breath in them.
they are vanity the work of errors in the time of their
visitation they shall perish.
the portion of Jacob is not like them for he is the former of
all things and Israel is the rod of his inheritance the lord
of hosts is his name.
thou art my battle axe and weapons of war for with thee will
I break in pieces the nations and with thee will I destroy
kingdoms
and with thee will I break in pieces the horse and his rider
and with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and his
rider
with thee also will I break in pieces man and woman and with
thee will I break in pieces old and young and with thee will
I break in pieces the young man and the maid
I will also break in pieces with thee the Shepherd and his
flock and with thee will I break in pieces the husbandman and
his yoke of oxen and with thee will I break in pieces
captains and rulers.
and I will render unto Babylon and to all the inhabitants of
Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in your
sight saith the lord.
behold I Am against thee O destroying mountain saith the
lord which destroyest all the earth and I will stretch out
mine hand upon thee and roll thee down from the rocks and
will make thee a burnt mountain.
and they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner nor a
stone for foundations but thou shalt be desolate for ever
saith the lord.
set ye up a standard in the land blow the trumpet among the
nations prepare the nations against her call together
against her the kingdoms of Ararat Minni and Ashchenaz
appoint a captain against her cause the horses to come up as
the rough caterpillers.
prepare against her the nations with the kings of the Medes
the captains thereof and all the rulers thereof and all the
land of his dominion.
and the land shall tremble and sorrow for every purpose of
the lord shall be performed against Babylon to make the land
of Babylon a desolation without an inhabitant.
the Mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight they have
remained in their holds their might hath failed they became
as women they have burned her dwellingplaces her bars are
broken.
one post shall run to meet another and one messenger to meet
another to shew the king of Babylon that his city is taken at
one end
and that the passages are stopped and the reeds they have
burned with fire and the men of war are affrighted.
for thus saith the lord of hosts the God of Israel the
daughter of Babylon is like a threshingfloor it is time to
thresh her yet a little while and the time of her harvest
shall come.
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me he hath
crushed me he hath made me an empty vessel he hath swallowed
me up like a dragon he hath filled his belly with my
delicates he hath cast me out.
the violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon shall
the inhabitant of Zion say and my blood upon the inhabitants
of Chaldea shall Jerusalem say.
therefore thus saith the lord behold I will plead thy cause
and take vengeance for thee and I will dry up her sea and
make her springs dry.
and Babylon shall become heaps a dwellingplace for dragons
an astonishment and an hissing without an inhabitant.
they shall roar together like lions they shall yell as lions
whelps.
in their heat I will make their feasts and I will make them
drunken that they may rejoice and sleep a perpetual sleep
and not wake saith the lord.
I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter like rams
with he goats.
how is Sheshach taken and how is the praise of the whole
earth surprised how is Babylon become an astonishment among
the nations
the sea is come up upon Babylon she is covered with the
multitude of the waves thereof.
her cities are a desolation a dry land and a wilderness a
land wherein no man dwelleth Neither doth any son of man pass
thereby.
and I will punish Bel in Babylon and I will bring forth out
of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up and the nations
shall not flow together any more unto him yea the wall of
Babylon shall fall.
my people go ye out of the midst of her and deliver ye every
man his soul from the fierce anger of the lord.
and lest your heart faint and ye fear for the rumour that
shall be heard in the land a rumour shall both come one year
and after that in another year shall come a rumour and
violence in the land ruler against ruler.
therefore behold the days come that I will do judgment upon
the graven images of Babylon and her whole land shall be
confounded and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.
then the heaven and the earth and all that is therein shall
sing for Babylon for the spoilers shall come unto her from
the north saith the lord.
as Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall so at
Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.
ye that have escaped the sword go away stand not still
remember the lord afar off and let Jerusalem come into your
mind.
we are confounded because we have heard reproach shame hath
covered our faces for strangers are come into the sanctuaries
of the lord s house.
wherefore behold the days come saith the lord that I will
do judgment upon her graven images and through all her land
the wounded shall groan.
though Babylon should mount up to heaven and though she
should fortify the height of her strength yet from me shall
spoilers come unto her saith the lord.
a sound of a cry cometh from Babylon and great destruction
from the land of the Chaldeans
because the lord hath spoiled Babylon and destroyed out of
her the great voice when her waves do roar like great waters
a noise of their voice is uttered
because the spoiler is come upon her even upon Babylon and
her Mighty men are taken every one of their bows is broken
for the lord God of recompences shall surely requite.
and I will make drunk her princes and her wise men her
captains and her rulers and her Mighty men and they shall
sleep a perpetual sleep and not wake saith the king whose
name is the lord of hosts.
thus saith the lord of hosts the broad walls of Babylon shall
be utterly broken and her high gates shall be burned with
fire and the people shall labour in vain and the folk in the
fire and they shall be weary.
the word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son
of Neriah the son of Maaseiah when he went with Zedekiah the
king of Judah into Babylon in the fourth year of his reign.
and this Seraiah was a quiet prince.
so Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon
Babylon even all these words that are written against
Babylon.
and Jeremiah said to Seraiah when thou comest to Babylon and
shalt see and shalt read all these words
then shalt thou say O lord thou hast spoken against this
place to cut it off that none shall remain in it Neither
man nor beast but that it shall be desolate for ever.
and it shall be when thou hast made an end of reading this
book that thou shalt bind a stone to it and cast it into the
midst of Euphrates
and thou shalt say thus shall Babylon sink and shall not
rise from the evil that I will bring upon her and they shall
be weary. thus far are the words of Jeremiah.
Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign
and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. and his mother s
name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
and he did that which was evil in the eyes of the lord
according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
for through the anger of the lord it came to pass in Jerusalem
and Judah till he had cast them out from his presence that
Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
and it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign in the
tenth month in the tenth day of the month that
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came he and all his army
against Jerusalem and pitched against it and built forts
against it round about.
so the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king
Zedekiah.
and in the fourth month in the ninth day of the month the
famine was sore in the city so that there was no bread for
the people of the land.
then the city was broken up and all the men of war fled and
went forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate
between the two walls which was by the king s garden now
the Chaldeans were by the city round about and they went by
the way of the plain.
but the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king and
overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho and all his army
was scattered from him.
then they took the king and carried him up unto the king of
Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath where he gave
judgment upon him.
and the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his
eyes he slew also all the princes of Judah in Riblah.
then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah and the king of Babylon
bound him in chains and carried him to Babylon and put him
in prison till the day of his death.
now in the fifth month in the tenth day of the month which
was the nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon
came Nebuzaradan captain of the guard which served the king
of Babylon into Jerusalem
and burned the house of the lord and the king s house and
all the houses of Jerusalem and all the houses of the great
men burned he with fire
and all the army of the Chaldeans that were with the captain
of the guard brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round
about.
then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive
certain of the poor of the people and the residue of the
people that remained in the city and those that fell away
that fell to the king of Babylon and the rest of the
multitude.
but Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left certain of the
poor of the land for vinedressers and for husbandmen.
also the pillars of brass that were in the house of the lord
and the bases and the brasen sea that was in the house of the
lord the Chaldeans brake and carried all the brass of them
to Babylon.
the caldrons also and the shovels and the snuffers and the
bowls and the spoons and all the vessels of brass wherewith
they ministered took they away.
and the basons and the firepans and the bowls and the
caldrons and the candlesticks and the spoons and the cups
that which was of gold in gold and that which was of Silver
in Silver took the captain of the guard away.
the two pillars one sea and twelve brasen bulls that were
under the bases which king Solomon had made in the house of
the lord the brass of all these vessels was without weight.
and concerning the pillars the height of one pillar was
eighteen cubits and a fillet of twelve cubits did compass it
and the thickness thereof was four fingers it was hollow.
and a chapiter of brass was upon it and the height of one
chapiter was five cubits with network and pomegranates upon
the chapiters round about all of brass. the second pillar
also and the pomegranates were like unto these.
and there were ninety and six pomegranates on a side and all
the pomegranates upon the network were an hundred round about.
and the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest
and Zephaniah the second priest and the three keepers of the
door
he took also out of the city an eunuch which had the charge
of the men of war and seven men of them that were near the
king s person which were found in the city and the principal
scribe of the host who mustered the people of the land and
threescore men of the people of the land that were found in
the midst of the city.
so Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them and brought
them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.
and the king of Babylon smote them and put them to death in
Riblah in the land of Hamath. thus Judah was carried away
captive out of his own land.
this is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried away captive
in the seventh year three thousand Jews and three and twenty
in the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he carried away
captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons
in the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan
the captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews
seven hundred forty and five persons all the persons were
four thousand and six hundred.
and it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the
captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah in the twelfth month
in the five and twentieth day of the month that Evilmerodach
king of Babylon in the first year of his reign lifted up the
head of Jehoiachin king of Judah and brought him forth out of
prison.
and spake kindly unto him and set his throne above the throne
of the kings that were with him in Babylon
and changed his prison garments and he did continually eat
bread before him all the days of his life.
and for his diet there was a continual diet given him of the
king of Babylon every day a portion until the day of his
death all the days of his life.
how doth the city sit solitary that was full of people how
is she become as a widow she that was great among the
nations and princess among the provinces how is she become
tributary
she weepeth sore in the night and her tears are on her
cheeks among all her lovers she hath none to comfort her all
her friends have dealt treacherously with her they are become
her enemies.
Judah is gone into captivity because of affliction and
because of great servitude she dwelleth among the heathen
she findeth no rest all her persecutors overtook her between
the straits.
the ways of Zion do mourn because none come to the solemn
feasts all her gates are desolate her priests Sigh her
virgins are afflicted and she is in bitterness.
her adversaries are the chief her enemies prosper for the
lord hath afflicted her for the multitude of her
transgressions her children are gone into captivity before
the enemy.
and from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed her
princes are become like harts that find no pasture and they
are gone without strength before the pursuer.
Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and of her
miseries all her pleasant things that she had in the days of
old when her people fell into the hand of the enemy and none
did help her the adversaries saw her and did mock at her
sabbaths.
Jerusalem hath grievously sinned therefore she is removed
all that honoured her despise her because they have seen her
nakedness yea she sigheth and turneth backward.
her filthiness is in her skirts she remembereth not her last
end therefore she came down wonderfully she had no
comforter. O lord behold my affliction for the enemy hath
magnified himself.
the adversary hath spread out his hand upon all her pleasant
things for she hath seen that the heathen entered into her
sanctuary whom thou didst command that they should not enter
into thy congregation.
all her people Sigh they seek bread they have given their
pleasant things for meat to relieve the soul see O lord and
consider for I Am become vile.
is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? behold and see if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto
me wherewith the lord hath afflicted me in the day of his
fierce anger.
from above hath he sent fire into my bones and it prevaileth
against them he hath spread a net for my feet he hath turned
me back he hath made me desolate and faint all the day.
the yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand they are
wreathed and come up upon my neck he hath made my strength
to fall the lord hath delivered me into their hands from
whom I Am not able to rise up.
the lord hath trodden under foot all my Mighty men in the
midst of me he hath called an assembly against me to crush my
young men the lord hath trodden the virgin the daughter of
Judah as in a winepress.
for these things I weep mine eye mine eye runneth down with
water because the comforter that should relieve my soul is
far from me my children are desolate because the enemy
prevailed.
Zion spreadeth forth her hands and there is none to comfort
her the lord hath commanded concerning Jacob that his
adversaries should be round about him Jerusalem is as a
menstruous woman among them.
the lord is righteous for I have rebelled against his
commandment hear I pray you all people and behold my
sorrow my virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.
I called for my lovers but they deceived me my priests and
mine elders gave up the ghost in the city while they sought
their meat to relieve their souls.
behold O lord for I Am in distress my bowels are troubled
mine heart is turned within me for I have grievously
rebelled abroad the sword bereaveth at home there is as
death.
they have heard that I Sigh there is none to comfort me all
mine enemies have heard of my trouble they are glad that thou
hast done it thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called
and they shall be like unto me.
let all their wickedness come before thee and do unto them
as thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions for my
sighs are many and my heart is faint.
how hath the lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in
his anger and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty
of Israel and remembered not his footstool in the day of his
anger
the lord hath swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob and
hath not pitied he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong
holds of the daughter of Judah he hath brought them down to
the ground he hath polluted the kingdom and the princes
thereof.
he hath cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of Israel he
hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemy and he
burned against Jacob like a flaming fire which devoureth
round about.
he hath bent his bow like an enemy he stood with his right
hand as an adversary and slew all that were pleasant to the
eye in the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion he poured out
his fury like fire.
the lord was as an enemy he hath swallowed up Israel he hath
swallowed up all her palaces he hath destroyed his strong
holds and hath increased in the daughter of Judah mourning
and lamentation.
and he hath violently taken away his tabernacle as if it were
of a garden he hath destroyed his places of the assembly the
lord hath caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be
forgotten in Zion and hath despised in the indignation of his
anger the king and the priest.
the lord hath cast off his altar he hath abhorred his
sanctuary he hath given up into the hand of the enemy the
walls of her palaces they have made a noise in the house of
the lord as in the day of a solemn feast.
the lord hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of
Zion he hath stretched out a line he hath not withdrawn his
hand from destroying therefore he made the rampart and the
wall to lament they languished together.
her gates are sunk into the ground he hath destroyed and
broken her bars her king and her princes are among the
Gentiles the law is no more her prophets also find no vision
from the lord.
the elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground and
keep silence they have cast up dust upon their heads they
have girded themselves with sackcloth the virgins of
Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.
mine eyes do fail with tears my bowels are troubled my liver
is poured upon the earth for the destruction of the daughter
of my people because the children and the sucklings swoon in
the streets of the city.
they say to their mothers where is corn and wine? when they
swooned as the wounded in the streets of the city when their
soul was poured out into their mothers bosom.
what thing shall I take to witness for thee? what thing shall
I liken to thee O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I equal
to thee that I may comfort thee O virgin daughter of Zion?
for thy breach is great like the sea who can heal thee?
thy prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee and
they have not discovered thine iniquity to turn away thy
captivity but have seen for thee false burdens and causes of
banishment.
all that pass by clap their hands at thee they hiss and wag
their head at the daughter of Jerusalem saying is this the
city that men call the perfection of beauty the joy of the
whole earth?
all thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee they
hiss and gnash the teeth they say we have swallowed her up
certainly this is the day that we looked for we have found
we have seen it.
the lord hath done that which he had devised he hath
fulfilled his word that he had commanded in the days of old
he hath thrown down and hath not pitied and he hath caused
thine enemy to rejoice over thee he hath set up the horn of
thine adversaries.
their heart cried unto the lord O wall of the daughter of
Zion let tears run down like a river day and night give
thyself no rest let not the apple of thine eye cease.
Arise cry out in the night in the beginning of the watches
pour out thine heart like water before the face of the lord
lift up thy hands toward him for the life of thy young
children that faint for hunger in the top of every street.
behold O lord and consider to whom thou hast done this.
shall the women eat their fruit and children of a span long?
shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of
the lord?
the young and the old lie on the ground in the streets my
virgins and my young men are fallen by the sword thou hast
slain them in the day of thine anger thou hast killed and
not pitied.
thou hast called as in a solemn day my terrors round about so
that in the day of the lord s anger none escaped nor remained
those that I have swaddled and brought up hath mine enemy
consumed.
I Am the man that hath seen affliction by the rod of his
wrath.
he hath led me and brought me into darkness but not into
light.
surely against me is he turned he turneth his hand against me
all the day.
my flesh and my skin hath he made old he hath broken my
bones.
he hath builded against me and compassed me with gall and
travail.
he hath set me in dark places as they that be dead of old.
he hath hedged me about that I cannot get out he hath made
my chain heavy.
also when I cry and shout he shutteth out my prayer.
he hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone he hath made my
paths crooked.
he was unto me as a bear lying in wait and as a lion in
secret places.
he hath turned aside my ways and pulled me in pieces he hath
made me desolate.
he hath bent his bow and set me as a Mark for the arrow.
he hath caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my
reins.
I was a derision to all my people and their song all the day.
he hath filled me with bitterness he hath made me drunken
with wormwood.
he hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones he hath
covered me with ashes.
and thou hast removed my soul far off from peace I forgat
prosperity.
and I said my strength and my hope is perished from the lord
remembering mine affliction and my misery the wormwood and
the gall.
my soul hath them still in remembrance and is humbled in me.
this I recall to my mind therefore have I hope.
it is of the lord s mercies that we are not consumed because
his compassions fail not.
they are new every morning great is thy faithfulness.
the lord is my portion saith my soul therefore will I hope
in him.
the lord is good unto them that wait for him to the soul that
seeketh him.
it is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for
the salvation of the lord.
it is good for a man that he bear the yoke of his youth.
he sitteth alone and keepeth silence because he hath borne it
upon him.
he putteth his mouth in the dust if so be there may be hope.
he giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him he is filled full
with reproach.
for the lord will not cast off for ever
but though he cause grief yet will he have compassion
according to the multitude of his mercies.
for he doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of
men.
to crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth.
to turn aside the right of a man before the face of the most
high
to subvert a man in his cause the lord approveth not.
who is he that saith and it cometh to pass when the lord
commandeth it not?
out of the mouth of the most high proceedeth not evil and
good?
wherefore doth a living man complain a man for the punishment
of his sins?
let us search and try our ways and turn again to the lord.
let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the
heavens.
we have transgressed and have rebelled thou hast not
pardoned.
thou hast covered with anger and persecuted us thou hast
slain thou hast not pitied.
thou hast covered thyself with a cloud that our prayer should
not pass through.
thou hast made us as the offscouring and refuse in the midst
of the people.
all our enemies have opened their mouths against us.
fear and a snare is come upon us desolation and destruction.
mine eye runneth down with rivers of water for the destruction
of the daughter of my people.
mine eye trickleth down and ceaseth not without any
intermission.
till the lord look down and behold from heaven.
mine eye affecteth mine heart because of all the daughters of
my city.
mine enemies chased me sore like a bird without cause.
they have cut off my life in the dungeon and cast a stone
upon me.
waters flowed over mine head then I said I Am cut off.
I called upon thy name O lord out of the low dungeon.
thou hast heard my voice hide not thine ear at my breathing
at my cry.
thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee thou
saidst fear not.
O lord thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul thou hast
redeemed my life.
O lord thou hast seen my wrong judge thou my cause.
thou hast seen all their vengeance and all their imaginations
against me.
thou hast heard their reproach O lord and all their
imaginations against me
the lips of those that rose up against me and their device
against me all the day.
behold their sitting down and their rising up I Am their
musick.
render unto them a recompence O lord according to the work
of their hands.
give them sorrow of heart thy curse unto them.
persecute and destroy them in anger from under the heavens of
the lord.
how is the gold become dim how is the most fine gold changed
the stones of the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every
street.
the precious sons of Zion comparable to fine gold how are
they esteemed as earthen pitchers the work of the hands of
the potter
even the sea monsters draw out the breast they give suck to
their young ones the daughter of my people is become cruel
like the ostriches in the wilderness.
the tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his
mouth for thirst the young children ask bread and no man
breaketh it unto them.
they that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets
they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.
for the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my
people is greater than the punishment of the Sin of Sodom
that was overthrown as in a moment and no hands stayed on
her.
her Nazarites were purer than snow they were whiter than
milk they were more ruddy in body than rubies their
polishing was of sapphire
their visage is blacker than a coal they are not known in the
streets their skin cleaveth to their bones it is withered
it is become like a stick.
they that be slain with the sword are better than they that be
slain with hunger for these pine away stricken through for
want of the fruits of the field.
the hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children
they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my
people.
the lord hath accomplished his fury he hath poured out his
fierce anger and hath kindled a fire in Zion and it hath
devoured the foundations thereof.
the kings of the earth and all the inhabitants of the world
would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy
should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem.
for the sins of her prophets and the iniquities of her
priests that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of
her
they have wandered as blind men in the streets they have
polluted themselves with blood so that men could not touch
their garments.
they cried unto them depart ye it is unclean depart
depart touch not when they fled away and wandered they said
among the heathen they shall no more Sojourn there.
the anger of the lord hath divided them he will no more
regard them they respected not the persons of the priests
they favoured not the elders.
as for us our eyes as yet failed for our vain help in our
watching we have watched for a nation that could not save us.
they hunt our steps that we cannot go in our streets our end
is near our days are fulfilled for our end is come.
our persecutors are swifter than the eagles of the heaven
they pursued us upon the mountains they laid wait for us in
the wilderness.
the breath of our nostrils the anointed of the lord was
taken in their pits of whom we said under his shadow we
shall live among the heathen.
rejoice and be glad O daughter of Edom that dwellest in the
land of Uz the cup also shall pass through unto thee thou
shalt be drunken and shalt make thyself naked.
the punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished O daughter
of Zion he will no more carry thee away into captivity he
will visit thine iniquity O daughter of Edom he will
discover thy sins.
remember O lord what is come upon us consider and behold
our reproach.
our inheritance is turned to strangers our houses to aliens.
we are orphans and fatherless our mothers are as widows.
we have drunken our water for money our wood is sold unto us.
our necks are under persecution we labour and have no rest.
we have given the hand to the Egyptians and to the Assyrians
to be satisfied with bread.
our fathers have sinned and are not and we have borne their
iniquities.
servants have ruled over us there is none that doth deliver
us out of their hand.
we gat our bread with the peril of our lives because of the
sword of the wilderness.
our skin was black like an oven because of the terrible
famine.
they ravished the women in Zion and the maids in the cities
of Judah.
princes are hanged up by their hand the faces of elders were
not honoured.
they took the young men to grind and the children fell under
the wood.
the elders have ceased from the gate the young men from their
musick.
the joy of our heart is ceased our dance is turned into
mourning.
the crown is fallen from our head woe unto us that we have
sinned
for this our heart is faint for these things our eyes are
dim.
because of the mountain of Zion which is desolate the foxes
walk upon it.
thou O lord remainest for ever thy throne from generation
to generation.
wherefore dost thou forget us for ever and forsake us so long
time?
turn thou us unto thee O lord and we shall be turned renew
our days as of old.
but thou hast utterly rejected us thou art very wroth against
us.
now it came to pass in the thirtieth year in the fourth
month in the fifth day of the month as I was among the
captives by the river of Chebar that the heavens were opened
and I saw visions of God.
in the fifth day of the month which was the fifth year of
king Jehoiachin s captivity
the word of the lord came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest
the son of Buzi in the land of the Chaldeans by the river
Chebar and the hand of the lord was there upon him.
and I looked and behold a whirlwind came out of the north
a great cloud and a fire infolding itself and a brightness
was about it and out of the midst thereof as the colour of
amber out of the midst of the fire.
also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living
creatures. and this was their appearance they had the
likeness of a man.
and every one had four faces and every one had four wings.
and their feet were straight feet and the sole of their feet
was like the sole of a calf s foot and they sparkled like the
colour of burnished brass.
and they had the hands of a man under their wings on their
four sides and they four had their faces and their wings.
their wings were joined one to another they turned not when
they went they went every one straight forward.
as for the likeness of their faces they four had the face of
a man and the face of a lion on the right side and they
four had the face of an ox on the left side they four also
had the face of an eagle.
thus were their faces and their wings were stretched upward
two wings of every one were joined one to another and two
covered their bodies.
and they went every one straight forward whither the spirit
was to go they went and they turned not when they went.
as for the likeness of the living creatures their appearance
was like burning coals of fire and like the appearance of
lamps it went up and down among the living creatures and the
fire was bright and out of the fire went forth lightning.
and the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of
a flash of lightning.
now as I beheld the living creatures behold one wheel upon
the earth by the living creatures with his four faces.
the appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the
colour of a beryl and they four had one likeness and their
appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle
of a wheel.
when they went they went upon their four sides and they
turned not when they went.
as for their rings they were so high that they were dreadful
and their rings were full of eyes round about them four.
and when the living creatures went the wheels went by them
and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth
the wheels were lifted up.
whithersoever the spirit was to go they went thither was
their spirit to go and the wheels were lifted up over against
them for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.
when those went these went and when those stood these
stood and when those were lifted up from the earth the
wheels were lifted up over against them for the spirit of the
living creature was in the wheels.
and the likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living
creature was as the colour of the terrible crystal stretched
forth over their heads above.
and under the firmament were their wings straight the one
toward the other every one had two which covered on this
side and every one had two which covered on that side their
bodies.
and when they went I heard the noise of their wings like the
noise of great waters as the voice of the almighty the voice
of speech as the noise of an host when they stood they let
down their wings.
and there was a voice from the firmament that was over their
heads when they stood and had let down their wings.
and above the firmament that was over their heads was the
likeness of a throne as the appearance of a sapphire stone
and upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the
appearance of a man above upon it.
and I saw as the colour of amber as the appearance of fire
round about within it from the appearance of his loins even
upward and from the appearance of his loins even downward I
saw as it were the appearance of fire and it had brightness
round about.
as the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day
of rain so was the appearance of the brightness round about.
this was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the
lord. and when I saw it I fell upon my face and I heard a
voice of one that spake.
and he said unto me son of man stand upon thy feet and I
will speak unto thee.
and the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me and set
me upon my feet that I heard him that spake unto me.
and he said unto me son of man I send thee to the children
of Israel to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against
me they and their fathers have transgressed against me even
unto this very day.
for they are impudent children and stiffhearted. I do send
thee unto them and thou shalt say unto them thus saith the
lord God.
and they whether they will hear or whether they will
forbear for they are a rebellious house yet shall know
that there hath been a prophet among them.
and thou son of man be not afraid of them Neither be afraid
of their words though briers and thorns be with thee and
thou dost dwell among scorpions be not afraid of their words
nor be dismayed at their looks though they be a rebellious
house.
and thou shalt speak my words unto them whether they will
hear or whether they will forbear for they are most
rebellious.
but thou son of man hear what I say unto thee be not thou
rebellious like that rebellious house open thy mouth and eat
that I give thee.
and when I looked behold an hand was sent unto me and lo
a roll of a book was therein
and he spread it before me and it was written within and
without and there was written therein lamentations and
mourning and woe.
moreover he said unto me son of man eat that thou findest
eat this roll and go speak unto the house of Israel.
so I opened my mouth and he caused me to eat that roll.
and he said unto me son of man cause thy belly to eat and
fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. then did I
eat it and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.
and he said unto me son of man go get thee unto the house
of Israel and speak with my words unto them.
for thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech and of
an hard language but to the house of Israel
not to many people of a strange speech and of an hard
language whose words thou canst not understand. surely had I
sent thee to them they would have hearkened unto thee.
but the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee for they
will not hearken unto me for all the house of Israel are
impudent and hardhearted.
behold I have made thy face strong against their faces and
thy forehead strong against their foreheads.
as an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead fear
them not Neither be dismayed at their looks though they be a
rebellious house.
moreover he said unto me son of man all my words that I
shall speak unto thee receive in thine heart and hear with
thine ears.
and go get thee to them of the captivity unto the children
of thy people and speak unto them and tell them thus saith
the lord God whether they will hear or whether they will
forbear.
then the spirit took me up and I heard behind me a voice of a
great rushing saying blessed be the glory of the lord from
his place.
I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures
that touched one another and the noise of the wheels over
against them and a noise of a great rushing.
so the spirit lifted me up and took me away and I went in
bitterness in the heat of my spirit but the hand of the lord
was strong upon me.
then I came to them of the captivity at Telabib that dwelt by
the river of Chebar and I sat where they sat and remained
there astonished among them seven days.
and it came to pass at the end of seven days that the word of
the lord came unto me saying
son of man I have made thee a watchman unto the house of
Israel therefore hear the word at my mouth and give them
warning from me.
when I say unto the wicked thou shalt surely die and thou
givest him not warning nor speakest to warn the wicked from
his wicked way to save his life the same wicked man shall
die in his iniquity but his blood will I require at thine
hand.
yet if thou warn the wicked and he turn not from his
wickedness nor from his wicked way he shall die in his
iniquity but thou hast delivered thy soul.
again when a righteous man doth turn from his righteousness
and commit iniquity and I lay a stumbling-block before him
he shall die because thou hast not given him warning he
shall die in his Sin and his righteousness which he hath done
shall not be remembered but his blood will I require at thine
hand.
nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man that the
righteous Sin not and he doth not Sin he shall surely live
because he is warned also thou hast delivered thy soul.
and the hand of the lord was there upon me and he said unto
me Arise go forth into the plain and I will there talk with
thee.
then I arose and went forth into the plain and behold the
glory of the lord stood there as the glory which I saw by the
river of Chebar and I fell on my face.
then the spirit entered into me and set me upon my feet and
spake with me and said unto me go shut thyself within thine
house.
but thou O son of man behold they shall put Bands upon
thee and shall bind thee with them and thou shalt not go out
among them
and I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth
that thou shalt be dumb and shalt not be to them a reprover
for they are a rebellious house.
but when I speak with thee I will open thy mouth and thou
shalt say unto them thus saith the lord God he that heareth
let him hear and he that forbeareth let him forbear for
they are a rebellious house.
thou also son of man take thee a tile and lay it before
thee and pourtray upon it the city even Jerusalem
and lay siege against it and build a fort against it and
cast a mount against it set the camp also against it and set
battering rams against it round about.
moreover take thou unto thee an Iron pan and set it for a
wall of Iron between thee and the city and set thy face
against it and it shall be besieged and thou shalt lay siege
against it. this shall be a sign to the house of Israel.
lie thou also upon thy left side and lay the iniquity of the
house of Israel upon it according to the number of the days
that thou shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquity.
for I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity
according to the number of the days three hundred and ninety
days so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.
and when thou hast accomplished them lie again on thy right
side and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah
forty days I have appointed thee each day for a year.
therefore thou shalt set thy face toward the siege of
Jerusalem and thine arm shall be uncovered and thou shalt
prophesy against it.
and behold I will lay Bands upon thee and thou shalt not
turn thee from one side to another till thou hast ended the
days of thy siege.
take thou also unto thee wheat and barley and beans and
lentiles and millet and fitches and put them in one vessel
and make thee bread thereof according to the number of the
days that thou shalt lie upon thy side three hundred and
ninety days shalt thou eat thereof.
and thy meat which thou shalt eat shall be by weight twenty
shekels a day from time to time shalt thou eat it.
thou shalt drink also water by measure the sixth part of an
hin from time to time shalt thou drink.
and thou shalt eat it as barley cakes and thou shalt bake it
with dung that cometh out of man in their sight.
and the lord said even thus shall the children of Israel eat
their defiled bread among the Gentiles whither I will drive
them.
then said I ah lord God behold my soul hath not been
polluted for from my youth up even till now have I not eaten
of that which dieth of itself or is torn in pieces Neither
came there abominable flesh into my mouth.
then he said unto me lo I have given thee cow s dung for
man s dung and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith.
moreover he said unto me son of man behold I will break the
staff of bread in Jerusalem and they shall eat bread by
weight and with care and they shall drink water by measure
and with astonishment
that they may want bread and water and be astonied one with
another and consume away for their iniquity.
and thou son of man take thee a Sharp knife take thee a
barber s razor and cause it to pass upon thine head and upon
thy beard then take thee balances to weigh and divide the
hair.
thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the midst of the
city when the days of the siege are fulfilled and thou shalt
take a third part and smite about it with a knife and a
third part thou shalt scatter in the wind and I will draw out
a sword after them.
thou shalt also take thereof a few in number and bind them in
thy skirts.
then take of them again and cast them into the midst of the
fire and burn them in the fire for thereof shall a fire come
forth into all the house of Israel.
thus saith the lord God this is Jerusalem I have set it in
the midst of the nations and countries that are round about
her.
and she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than
the nations and my statutes more than the countries that are
round about her for they have refused my judgments and my
statutes they have not walked in them.
therefore thus saith the lord God because ye multiplied more
than the nations that are round about you and have not walked
in my statutes Neither have kept my judgments Neither have
done according to the judgments of the nations that are round
about you
therefore thus saith the lord God behold I even I Am
against thee and will execute judgments in the midst of thee
in the sight of the nations.
and I will do in thee that which I have not done and
whereunto I will not do any more the like because of all
thine abominations.
therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee
and the sons shall eat their fathers and I will execute
judgments in thee and the whole remnant of thee will I
scatter into all the winds.
wherefore as I live saith the lord God surely because thou
hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things and
with all thine abominations therefore will I also diminish
thee Neither shall mine eye spare Neither will I have any
pity.
a third part of thee shall die with the pestilence and with
famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee and a
third part shall fall by the sword round about thee and I
will scatter a third part into all the winds and I will draw
out a sword after them.
thus shall mine anger be accomplished and I will cause my
fury to rest upon them and I will be comforted and they
shall know that I the lord have spoken it in my zeal when I
have accomplished my fury in them.
moreover I will make thee waste and a reproach among the
nations that are round about thee in the sight of all that
pass by.
so it shall be a reproach and a taunt an instruction and an
astonishment unto the nations that are round about thee when
I shall execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury and in
furious rebukes. I the lord have spoken it.
when I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine which
shall be for their destruction and which I will send to
destroy you and I will increase the famine upon you and will
break your staff of bread
so will I send upon you famine and evil beasts and they shall
bereave thee and pestilence and blood shall pass through
thee and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the lord have
spoken it.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man set thy face toward the mountains of Israel and
prophesy against them
and say ye mountains of Israel hear the word of the lord
God thus saith the lord God to the mountains and to the
hills to the rivers and to the valleys behold I even I
will bring a sword upon you and I will destroy your high
places.
and your altars shall be desolate and your images shall be
broken and I will cast down your slain men before your idols.
and I will lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel
before their idols and I will scatter your bones round about
your altars.
in all your dwellingplaces the cities shall be laid waste and
the high places shall be desolate that your altars may be
laid waste and made desolate and your idols may be broken and
cease and your images may be cut down and your works may be
abolished.
and the slain shall fall in the midst of you and ye shall
know that I Am the lord.
yet will I leave a remnant that ye may have some that shall
escape the sword among the nations when ye shall be scattered
through the countries.
and they that escape of you shall remember me among the
nations whither they shall be carried captives because I Am
broken with their whorish heart which hath departed from me
and with their eyes which go a whoring after their idols and
they shall lothe themselves for the evils which they have
committed in all their abominations.
and they shall know that I Am the lord and that I have not
said in vain that I would do this evil unto them.
thus saith the lord God smite with thine hand and stamp with
thy foot and say alas for all the evil abominations of the
house of Israel for they shall fall by the sword by the
famine and by the pestilence.
he that is far off shall die of the pestilence and he that is
near shall fall by the sword and he that remaineth and is
besieged shall die by the famine thus will I accomplish my
fury upon them.
then shall ye know that I Am the lord when their slain men
shall be among their idols round about their altars upon
every high hill in all the tops of the mountains and under
every green tree and under every thick oak the place where
they did offer sweet savour to all their idols.
so will I stretch out my hand upon them and make the land
desolate yea more desolate than the wilderness toward
Diblath in all their habitations and they shall know that I
Am the lord.
moreover the word of the lord came unto me saying
also thou son of man thus saith the lord God unto the land
of Israel an end the end is come upon the four corners of
the land.
now is the end come upon thee and I will send mine anger upon
thee and will judge thee according to thy ways and will
recompense upon thee all thine abominations.
and mine eye shall not spare thee Neither will I have pity
but I will recompense thy ways upon thee and thine
abominations shall be in the midst of thee and ye shall know
that I Am the lord.
thus saith the lord God an evil an only evil behold is
come.
an end is come the end is come it watcheth for thee behold
it is come.
the morning is come unto thee O thou that dwellest in the
land the time is come the day of trouble is near and not
the sounding again of the mountains.
now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee and accomplish
mine anger upon thee and I will judge thee according to thy
ways and will recompense thee for all thine abominations.
and mine eye shall not spare Neither will I have pity I will
recompense thee according to thy ways and thine abominations
that are in the midst of thee and ye shall know that I Am the
lord that smiteth.
behold the day behold it is come the morning is gone forth
the rod hath blossomed pride hath budded.
violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness none of them
shall remain nor of their multitude nor of any of their s
Neither shall there be wailing for them.
the time is come the day draweth near let not the buyer
rejoice nor the seller mourn for wrath is upon all the
multitude thereof.
for the seller shall not return to that which is sold
although they were yet alive for the vision is touching the
whole multitude thereof which shall not return Neither shall
any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.
they have blown the trumpet even to make all ready but none
goeth to the battle for my wrath is upon all the multitude
thereof.
the sword is without and the pestilence and the famine
within he that is in the field shall die with the sword and
he that is in the city famine and pestilence shall devour
him.
but they that escape of them shall escape and shall be on the
mountains like doves of the valleys all of them mourning
every one for his iniquity.
all hands shall be feeble and all knees shall be weak as
water.
they shall also gird themselves with sackcloth and horror
shall cover them and shame shall be upon all faces and
baldness upon all their heads.
they shall cast their Silver in the streets and their gold
shall be removed their Silver and their gold shall not be
able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the lord they
shall not satisfy their souls Neither fill their bowels
because it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity.
as for the beauty of his ornament he set it in majesty but
they made the images of their abominations and of their
detestable things therein therefore have I set it far from
them.
and I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey
and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil and they shall
pollute it.
my face will I turn also from them and they shall pollute my
secret place for the robbers shall enter into it and defile
it.
make a chain for the land is full of bloody crimes and the
city is full of violence.
wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen and they
shall possess their houses I will also make the pomp of the
strong to cease and their holy places shall be defiled.
destruction cometh and they shall seek peace and there shall
be none.
mischief shall come upon mischief and rumour shall be upon
rumour then shall they seek a vision of the prophet but the
law shall perish from the priest and counsel from the
ancients.
the king shall mourn and the prince shall be clothed with
desolation and the hands of the people of the land shall be
troubled I will do unto them after their way and according
to their deserts will I judge them and they shall know that I
Am the lord.
and it came to pass in the sixth year in the sixth month in
the fifth day of the month as I sat in mine house and the
elders of Judah sat before me that the hand of the lord God
fell there upon me.
then I beheld and lo a likeness as the appearance of fire
from the appearance of his loins even downward fire and from
his loins even upward as the appearance of brightness as the
colour of amber.
and he put forth the form of an hand and took me by a lock of
mine head and the spirit lifted me up between the earth and
the heaven and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem
to the door of the inner gate that looketh toward the north
where was the seat of the image of jealousy which provoketh
to jealousy.
and behold the glory of the God of Israel was there
according to the vision that I saw in the plain.
then said he unto me son of man lift up thine eyes now the
way toward the north. so I lifted up mine eyes the way toward
the north and behold northward at the gate of the altar this
image of jealousy in the entry.
he said furthermore unto me son of man seest thou what they
do? even the great abominations that the house of Israel
committeth here that I should go far off from my sanctuary?
but turn thee yet again and thou shalt see greater
abominations.
and he brought me to the door of the court and when I looked
behold a hole in the wall.
then said he unto me son of man dig now in the wall and
when I had digged in the wall behold a door.
and he said unto me go in and behold the wicked abominations
that they do here.
so I went in and saw and behold every form of creeping
things and abominable beasts and all the idols of the house
of Israel pourtrayed upon the wall round about.
and there stood before them seventy men of the ancients of the
house of Israel and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the
son of Shaphan with every man his censer in his hand and a
thick cloud of incense went up.
then said he unto me son of man hast thou seen what the
ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark every man in
the chambers of his imagery? for they say the lord seeth us
not the lord hath forsaken the earth.
he said also unto me turn thee yet again and thou shalt see
greater abominations that they do.
then he brought me to the door of the gate of the lord s house
which was toward the north and behold there sat women
weeping for Tammuz.
then said he unto me hast thou seen this O son of man? turn
thee yet again and thou shalt see greater abominations than
these.
and he brought me into the inner court of the lord s house
and behold at the door of the temple of the lord between
the porch and the altar were about five and twenty men with
their backs toward the temple of the lord and their faces
toward the east and they worshipped the sun toward the east.
then he said unto me hast thou seen this O son of man? is it
a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the
abominations which they commit here? for they have filled the
land with violence and have returned to provoke me to anger
and lo they put the branch to their nose.
therefore will I also deal in fury mine eye shall not spare
Neither will I have pity and though they cry in mine ears
with a loud voice yet will I not hear them.
he cried also in mine ears with a loud voice saying cause
them that have charge over the city to draw near even every
man with his destroying weapon in his hand.
and behold six men came from the way of the higher gate
which lieth toward the north and every man a slaughter weapon
in his hand and one man among them was clothed with linen
with a writer s inkhorn by his side and they went in and
stood beside the brasen altar.
and the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the
Cherub whereupon he was to the threshold of the house. and
he called to the man clothed with linen which had the
writer s inkhorn by his side
and the lord said unto him go through the midst of the city
through the midst of Jerusalem and set a Mark upon the
foreheads of the men that Sigh and that cry for all the
abominations that be done in the midst thereof.
and to the others he said in mine hearing go ye after him
through the city and smite let not your eye spare Neither
have ye pity
slay utterly old and young both maids and little children
and women but come not near any man upon whom is the Mark
and begin at my sanctuary. then they began at the ancient men
which were before the house.
and he said unto them defile the house and fill the courts
with the slain go ye forth. and they went forth and slew in
the city.
and it came to pass while they were slaying them and I was
left that I fell upon my face and cried and said ah lord
God wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel in thy
pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem?
then said he unto me the iniquity of the house of Israel and
Judah is exceeding great and the land is full of blood and
the city full of perverseness for they say the lord hath
forsaken the earth and the lord seeth not.
and as for me also mine eye shall not spare Neither will I
have pity but I will recompense their way upon their head.
and behold the man clothed with linen which had the inkhorn
by his side reported the matter saying I have done as thou
hast commanded me.
then I looked and behold in the firmament that was above
the head of the Cherubims there appeared over them as it were
a sapphire stone as the appearance of the likeness of a
throne.
and he spake unto the man clothed with linen and said go in
between the wheels even under the Cherub and fill thine hand
with coals of fire from between the Cherubims and scatter
them over the city. and he went in in my sight.
now the Cherubims stood on the right side of the house when
the man went in and the cloud filled the inner court.
then the glory of the lord went up from the Cherub and stood
over the threshold of the house and the house was filled with
the cloud and the court was full of the brightness of the
lord s glory.
and the sound of the Cherubims wings was heard even to the
outer court as the voice of the almighty God when he
speaketh.
and it came to pass that when he had commanded the man
clothed with linen saying take fire from between the wheels
from between the Cherubims then he went in and stood beside
the wheels.
and one Cherub stretched forth his hand from between the
Cherubims unto the fire that was between the Cherubims and
took thereof and put it into the hands of him that was
clothed with linen who took it and went out.
and there appeared in the Cherubims the form of a man s hand
under their wings.
and when I looked behold the four wheels by the Cherubims
one wheel by one Cherub and another wheel by another Cherub
and the appearance of the wheels was as the colour of a beryl
stone.
and as for their appearances they four had one likeness as
if a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel.
when they went they went upon their four sides they turned
not as they went but to the place whither the head looked
they followed it they turned not as they went.
and their whole body and their backs and their hands and
their wings and the wheels were full of eyes round about
even the wheels that they four had.
as for the wheels it was cried unto them in my hearing O
wheel.
and every one had four faces the first face was the face of a
Cherub and the second face was the face of a man and the
third the face of a lion and the fourth the face of an eagle.
and the Cherubims were lifted up. this is the living creature
that I saw by the river of Chebar.
and when the Cherubims went the wheels went by them and when
the Cherubims lifted up their wings to mount up from the
earth the same wheels also turned not from beside them.
when they stood these stood and when they were lifted up
these lifted up themselves also for the spirit of the living
creature was in them.
then the glory of the lord departed from off the threshold of
the house and stood over the Cherubims.
and the Cherubims lifted up their wings and mounted up from
the earth in my sight when they went out the wheels also
were beside them and every one stood at the door of the east
gate of the lord s house and the glory of the God of Israel
was over them above.
this is the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel
by the river of Chebar and I knew that they were the
Cherubims.
every one had four faces apiece and every one four wings and
the likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings.
and the likeness of their faces was the same faces which I saw
by the river of Chebar their appearances and themselves they
went every one straight forward.
moreover the spirit lifted me up and brought me unto the east
gate of the lord s house which looketh eastward and behold
at the door of the gate five and twenty men among whom I saw
Jaazaniah the son of Azur and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah
princes of the people.
then said he unto me son of man these are the men that
devise mischief and give wicked counsel in this city
which say it is not near let us build houses this city is
the caldron and we be the flesh.
therefore prophesy against them prophesy O son of man.
and the spirit of the lord fell upon me and said unto me
speak thus saith the lord thus have ye said O house of
Israel for I know the things that come into your mind every
one of them.
ye have multiplied your slain in this city and ye have filled
the streets thereof with the slain.
therefore thus saith the lord God your slain whom ye have
laid in the midst of it they are the flesh and this city is
the caldron but I will bring you forth out of the midst of
it.
ye have feared the sword and I will bring a sword upon you
saith the lord God.
and I will bring you out of the midst thereof and deliver you
into the hands of strangers and will execute judgments among
you.
ye shall fall by the sword I will judge you in the border of
Israel and ye shall know that I Am the lord.
this city shall not be your caldron Neither shall ye be the
flesh in the midst thereof but I will judge you in the border
of Israel
and ye shall know that I Am the lord for ye have not walked
in my statutes Neither executed my judgments but have done
after the manners of the heathen that are round about you.
and it came to pass when I prophesied that Pelatiah the son
of Benaiah died. then fell I down upon my face and cried with
a loud voice and said ah lord God wilt thou make a full end
of the remnant of Israel?
again the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man thy brethren even thy brethren the men of thy
kindred and all the house of Israel wholly are they unto
whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said get you far from
the lord unto us is this land given in possession.
therefore say thus saith the lord God although I have cast
them far off among the heathen and although I have scattered
them among the countries yet will I be to them as a little
sanctuary in the countries where they shall come.
therefore say thus saith the lord God I will even gather you
from the people and assemble you out of the countries where
ye have been scattered and I will give you the land of
Israel.
and they shall come thither and they shall take away all the
detestable things thereof and all the abominations thereof
from thence.
and I will give them one heart and I will put a new spirit
within you and I will take the stony heart out of their
flesh and will give them an heart of flesh
that they may walk in my statutes and keep mine ordinances
and do them and they shall be my people and I will be their
God.
but as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their
detestable things and their abominations I will recompense
their way upon their own heads saith the lord God.
then did the Cherubims lift up their wings and the wheels
beside them and the glory of the God of Israel was over them
above.
and the glory of the lord went up from the midst of the city
and stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the
city.
afterwards the spirit took me up and brought me in a vision
by the spirit of God into Chaldea to them of the captivity.
so the vision that I had seen went up from me.
then I spake unto them of the captivity all the things that
the lord had shewed me.
the word of the lord also came unto me saying
son of man thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house
which have eyes to see and see not they have ears to hear
and hear not for they are a rebellious house.
therefore thou son of man prepare thee stuff for removing
and remove by day in their sight and thou shalt remove from
thy place to another place in their sight it may be they will
consider though they be a rebellious house.
then shalt thou bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight
as stuff for removing and thou shalt go forth at even in
their sight as they that go forth into captivity.
dig thou through the wall in their sight and carry out
thereby.
in their sight shalt thou bear it upon thy shoulders and
carry it forth in the twilight thou shalt cover thy face
that thou see not the ground for I have set thee for a sign
unto the house of Israel.
and I did so as I was commanded I brought forth my stuff by
day as stuff for captivity and in the even I digged through
the wall with mine hand I brought it forth in the twilight
and I bare it upon my shoulder in their sight.
and in the morning came the word of the lord unto me saying
son of man hath not the house of Israel the rebellious
house said unto thee what doest thou?
say thou unto them thus saith the lord God this burden
concerneth the prince in Jerusalem and all the house of
Israel that are among them.
say I Am your sign like as I have done so shall it be done
unto them they shall remove and go into captivity.
and the prince that is among them shall bear upon his shoulder
in the twilight and shall go forth they shall dig through
the wall to carry out thereby he shall cover his face that
he see not the ground with his eyes.
my net also will I spread upon him and he shall be taken in
my snare and I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the
Chaldeans yet shall he not see it though he shall die there.
and I will scatter toward every wind all that are about him to
help him and all his Bands and I will draw out the sword
after them.
and they shall know that I Am the lord when I shall scatter
them among the nations and disperse them in the countries.
but I will leave a few men of them from the sword from the
famine and from the pestilence that they may declare all
their abominations among the heathen whither they come and
they shall know that I Am the lord.
moreover the word of the lord came to me saying
son of man eat thy bread with quaking and drink thy water
with trembling and with carefulness
and say unto the people of the land thus saith the lord God
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem and of the land of Israel
they shall eat their bread with carefulness and drink their
water with astonishment that her land may be desolate from
all that is therein because of the violence of all them that
dwell therein.
and the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste and the
land shall be desolate and ye shall know that I Am the lord.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man what is that proverb that ye have in the land of
Israel saying the days are prolonged and every vision
faileth?
tell them therefore thus saith the lord God I will make this
proverb to cease and they shall no more use it as a proverb
in Israel but say unto them the days are at hand and the
effect of every vision.
for there shall be no more any vain vision nor flattering
divination within the house of Israel.
for I Am the lord I will speak and the word that I shall
speak shall come to pass it shall be no more prolonged for
in your days O rebellious house will I say the word and
will perform it saith the lord God.
again the word of the lord came to me saying.
son of man behold they of the house of Israel say the
vision that he seeth is for many days to come and he
prophesieth of the times that are far off.
therefore say unto them thus saith the lord God there shall
none of my words be prolonged any more but the word which I
have spoken shall be done saith the lord God.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man prophesy against the prophets of Israel that
prophesy and say thou unto them that prophesy out of their
own hearts hear ye the word of the lord
thus saith the lord God woe unto the foolish prophets that
follow their own spirit and have seen nothing
O Israel thy prophets are like the foxes in the deserts.
ye have not gone up into the gaps Neither made up the hedge
for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of
the lord.
they have seen vanity and lying divination saying the lord
saith and the lord hath not sent them and they have made
others to hope that they would confirm the word.
have ye not seen a vain vision and have ye not spoken a lying
divination whereas ye say the lord saith it albeit I have
not spoken?
therefore thus saith the lord God because ye have spoken
vanity and seen lies therefore behold I Am against you
saith the lord God.
and mine hand shall be upon the prophets that see vanity and
that divine lies they shall not be in the assembly of my
people Neither shall they be written in the writing of the
house of Israel Neither shall they enter into the land of
Israel and ye shall know that I Am the lord God.
because even because they have seduced my people saying
peace and there was no peace and one built up a wall and
lo others daubed it with untempered morter
say unto them which daub it with untempered morter that it
shall fall there shall be an overflowing shower and ye O
great hailstones shall fall and a stormy wind shall rend it.
lo when the wall is fallen shall it not be said unto you
where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?
therefore thus saith the lord God I will even rend it with a
stormy wind in my fury and there shall be an overflowing
shower in mine anger and great hailstones in my fury to
consume it.
so will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with
untempered morter and bring it down to the ground so that
the foundation thereof shall be discovered and it shall fall
and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof and ye shall
know that I Am the lord.
thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall and upon them
that have daubed it with untempered morter and will say unto
you the wall is no more Neither they that daubed it
to wit the prophets of Israel which prophesy concerning
Jerusalem and which see visions of peace for her and there
is no peace saith the lord God.
likewise thou son of man set thy face against the daughters
of thy people which prophesy out of their own heart and
prophesy thou against them
and say thus saith the lord God woe to the women that sew
pillows to all armholes and make kerchiefs upon the head of
every stature to hunt souls will ye hunt the souls of my
people and will ye save the souls alive that come unto you?
and will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley
and for pieces of bread to slay the souls that should not
die and to save the souls alive that should not live by your
lying to my people that hear your lies?
wherefore thus saith the lord God behold I Am against your
pillows wherewith ye there hunt the souls to make them fly
and I will tear them from your arms and will let the souls
go even the souls that ye hunt to make them fly.
your kerchiefs also will I tear and deliver my people out of
your hand and they shall be no more in your hand to be
hunted and ye shall know that I Am the lord.
because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad
whom I have not made sad and strengthened the hands of the
wicked that he should not return from his wicked way by
promising him life
therefore ye shall see no more vanity nor divine divinations
for I will deliver my people out of your hand and ye shall
know that I Am the lord.
then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me and sat
before me.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man these men have set up their idols in their heart
and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity before their
face should I be enquired of at all by them?
therefore speak unto them and say unto them thus saith the
lord God every man of the house of Israel that setteth up his
idols in his heart and putteth the stumblingblock of his
iniquity before his face and cometh to the prophet I the
lord will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of
his idols
that I may take the house of Israel in their own heart
because they are all estranged from me through their idols.
therefore say unto the house of Israel thus saith the lord
God repent and turn yourselves from your idols and turn
away your faces from all your abominations.
for every one of the house of Israel or of the stranger that
sojourneth in Israel which separateth himself from me and
setteth up his idols in his heart and putteth the
stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face and cometh to
a prophet to enquire of him concerning me I the lord will
answer him by myself
and I will set my face against that man and will make him a
sign and a proverb and I will cut him off from the midst of
my people and ye shall know that I Am the lord.
and if the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing I
the lord have deceived that prophet and I will stretch out my
hand upon him and will destroy him from the midst of my
people Israel.
and they shall bear the punishment of their iniquity the
punishment of the prophet shall be even as the punishment of
him that seeketh unto him
that the house of Israel may go no more astray from me
Neither be polluted any more with all their transgressions
but that they may be my people and I may be their God saith
the lord God.
the word of the lord came again to me saying
son of man when the land sinneth against me by trespassing
grievously then will I stretch out mine hand upon it and
will break the staff of the bread thereof and will send
famine upon it and will cut off man and beast from it
though these three men Noah Daniel and Job were in it
they should deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness saith the lord God.
if I cause noisome beasts to pass through the land and they
spoil it so that it be desolate that no man may pass through
because of the beasts
though these three men were in it as I live saith the lord
God they shall deliver Neither sons nor daughters they only
shall be delivered but the land shall be desolate.
or if I bring a sword upon that land and say sword go
through the land so that I cut off man and beast from it
though these three men were in it as I live saith the lord
God they shall deliver Neither sons nor daughters but they
only shall be delivered themselves.
or if I send a pestilence into that land and pour out my fury
upon it in blood to cut off from it man and beast
though Noah Daniel and Job were in it as I live saith the
lord God they shall deliver Neither son nor daughter they
shall but deliver their own souls by their righteousness.
for thus saith the lord God how Much more when I send my four
sore judgments upon Jerusalem the sword and the famine and
the noisome beast and the pestilence to cut off from it man
and beast?
yet behold therein shall be left a remnant that shall be
brought forth both sons and daughters behold they shall
come forth unto you and ye shall see their way and their
doings and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I
have brought upon Jerusalem even concerning all that I have
brought upon it.
and they shall comfort you when ye see their ways and their
doings and ye shall know that I have not done without cause
all that I have done in it saith the lord God.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man what is the vine tree more than any tree or than
a branch which is among the trees of the forest?
shall wood be taken thereof to do any work? or will men take a
pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?
behold it is cast into the fire for fuel the fire devoureth
both the ends of it and the midst of it is burned. is it meet
for any work?
behold when it was whole it was meet for no work how Much
less shall it be meet yet for any work when the fire hath
devoured it and it is burned?
therefore thus saith the lord God as the vine tree among the
trees of the forest which I have given to the fire for fuel
so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
and I will set my face against them they shall go out from
one fire and another fire shall devour them and ye shall
know that I Am the lord when I set my face against them.
and I will make the land desolate because they have committed
a trespass saith the lord God.
again the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man cause Jerusalem to know her abominations
and say thus saith the lord God unto Jerusalem thy birth and
thy nativity is of the land of Canaan thy father was an
Amorite and thy mother an Hittite.
and as for thy nativity in the day thou wast born thy navel
was not cut Neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee
thou wast not salted at all nor swaddled at all.
none eye pitied thee to do any of these unto thee to have
compassion upon thee but thou wast cast out in the open
field to the lothing of thy person in the day that thou wast
born.
and when I passed by thee and saw thee polluted in thine own
blood I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood live
yea I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood live.
I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field and
thou hast increased and waxen great and thou art come to
excellent ornaments thy breasts are fashioned and thine hair
is grown whereas thou wast naked and bare.
now when I passed by thee and looked upon thee behold thy
time was the time of love and I spread my skirt over thee
and covered thy nakedness yea I sware unto thee and entered
into a covenant with thee saith the lord God and thou
becamest mine.
then washed I thee with water yea I throughly washed away
thy blood from thee and I anointed thee with oil.
I clothed thee also with broidered work and shod thee with
badgers skin and I girded thee about with fine linen and I
covered thee with silk.
I decked thee also with ornaments and I put bracelets upon
thy hands and a chain on thy neck.
and I put a jewel on thy forehead and earrings in thine ears
and a beautiful crown upon thine head.
thus wast thou decked with gold and Silver and thy raiment
was of fine linen and silk and broidered work thou didst
eat fine flour and honey and oil and thou wast exceeding
beautiful and thou didst prosper into a kingdom.
and thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty
for it was perfect through my comeliness which I had put upon
thee saith the lord God.
but thou didst trust in thine own beauty and playedst the
harlot because of thy renown and pouredst out thy
fornications on every one that passed by his it was.
and of thy garments thou didst take and deckedst thy high
places with divers colours and playedst the harlot thereupon
the like things shall not come Neither shall it be so.
thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold and of my
Silver which I had given thee and madest to thyself images
of men and didst commit whoredom with them
and tookest thy broidered garments and coveredst them and
thou hast set mine oil and mine incense before them.
my meat also which I gave thee fine flour and oil and
honey wherewith I fed thee thou hast even set it before them
for a sweet savour and thus it was saith the lord God.
moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters whom thou
hast borne unto me and these hast thou sacrificed unto them
to be devoured. is this of thy whoredoms a small matter
that thou hast slain my children and delivered them to cause
them to pass through the fire for them?
and in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms thou hast not
remembered the days of thy youth when thou wast naked and
bare and wast polluted in thy blood.
and it came to pass after all thy wickedness woe woe unto
thee saith the lord God
that thou hast also built unto thee an eminent place and hast
made thee an high place in every street.
thou hast built thy high place at every head of the way and
hast made thy beauty to be abhorred and hast opened thy feet
to every one that passed by and multiplied thy whoredoms.
thou hast also committed fornication with the Egyptians thy
neighbours great of flesh and hast increased thy whoredoms
to provoke me to anger.
behold therefore I have stretched out my hand over thee and
have diminished thine ordinary food and delivered thee unto
the will of them that hate thee the daughters of the
Philistines which are ashamed of thy lewd way.
thou hast played the whore also with the Assyrians because
thou wast unsatiable yea thou hast played the harlot with
them and yet couldest not be satisfied.
thou hast moreover multiplied thy fornication in the land of
Canaan unto Chaldea and yet thou wast not satisfied
therewith.
how weak is thine heart saith the lord God seeing thou doest
all these things the work of an imperious whorish woman
in that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every
way and makest thine high place in every street and hast not
been as an harlot in that thou scornest hire
but as a wife that committeth adultery which taketh strangers
instead of her husband
they give gifts to all whores but thou givest thy gifts to
all thy lovers and hirest them that they may come unto thee
on every side for thy whoredom.
and the contrary is in thee from other women in thy whoredoms
whereas none followeth thee to commit whoredoms and in that
thou givest a reward and no reward is given unto thee
therefore thou art contrary.
wherefore O harlot hear the word of the lord
thus saith the lord God because thy filthiness was poured
out and thy nakedness discovered through thy whoredoms with
thy lovers and with all the idols of thy abominations and by
the blood of thy children which thou didst give unto them
behold therefore I will gather all thy lovers with whom thou
hast taken pleasure and all them that thou hast loved with
all them that thou hast hated I will even gather them round
about against thee and will discover thy nakedness unto them
that they may see all thy nakedness.
and I will judge thee as women that break wedlock and shed
blood are judged and I will give thee blood in fury and
jealousy.
and I will also give thee into their hand and they shall
throw down thine eminent place and shall break down thy high
places they shall strip thee also of thy clothes and shall
take thy fair jewels and leave thee naked and bare.
they shall also bring up a company against thee and they
shall stone thee with stones and thrust thee through with
their swords.
and they shall burn thine houses with fire and execute
judgments upon thee in the sight of many women and I will
cause thee to cease from playing the harlot and thou also
shalt give no hire any more.
so will I make my fury toward thee to rest and my jealousy
shall depart from thee and I will be quiet and will be no
more angry.
because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth but
hast fretted me in all these things behold therefore I also
will recompense thy way upon thine head saith the lord God
and thou shalt not commit this lewdness above all thine
abominations.
behold every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb
against thee saying as is the mother so is her daughter.
thou art thy mother s daughter that lotheth her husband and
her children and thou art the sister of thy sisters which
lothed their husbands and their children your mother was an
Hittite and your father an Amorite.
and thine elder sister is Samaria she and her daughters that
dwell at thy left hand and thy younger sister that dwelleth
at thy right hand is Sodom and her daughters.
yet hast thou not walked after their ways nor done after
their abominations but as if that were a very little thing
thou wast corrupted more than they in all thy ways.
as I live saith the lord God Sodom thy sister hath not done
she nor her daughters as thou hast done thou and thy
daughters.
behold this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom pride
fulness of bread and abundance of idleness was in her and in
her daughters Neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor
and needy.
and they were haughty and committed abomination before me
therefore I took them away as I saw good.
Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins but thou hast
multiplied thine abominations more than they and hast
justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou
hast done.
thou also which hast judged thy sisters bear thine own shame
for thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable than
they they are more righteous than thou yea be thou
confounded also and bear thy shame in that thou hast
justified thy sisters.
when I shall bring again their captivity the captivity of
Sodom and her daughters and the captivity of Samaria and her
daughters then will I bring again the captivity of thy
captives in the midst of them
that thou mayest bear thine own shame and mayest be
confounded in all that thou hast done in that thou art a
comfort unto them.
when thy sisters Sodom and her daughters shall return to
their former estate and Samaria and her daughters shall
return to their former estate then thou and thy daughters
shall return to your former estate.
for thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day
of thy pride
before thy wickedness was discovered as at the time of thy
reproach of the daughters of Syria and all that are round
about her the daughters of the Philistines which despise
thee round about.
thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations saith the
lord.
for thus saith the lord God I will even deal with thee as
thou hast done which hast despised the oath in breaking the
covenant.
nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days
of thy youth and I will establish unto thee an everlasting
covenant.
then thou shalt remember thy ways and be ashamed when thou
shalt receive thy sisters thine elder and thy younger and I
will give them unto thee for daughters but not by thy
covenant.
and I will establish my covenant with thee and thou shalt
know that I Am the lord
that thou mayest remember and be confounded and never open
thy mouth any more because of thy shame when I Am pacified
toward thee for all that thou hast done saith the lord God.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man put forth a riddle and speak a parable unto the
house of Israel
and say thus saith the lord God a great eagle with great
wings longwinged full of feathers which had divers colours
came unto Lebanon and took the highest branch of the cedar
he cropped off the top of his young twigs and carried it into
a land of traffick he set it in a city of merchants.
he took also of the seed of the land and planted it in a
fruitful field he placed it by great waters and set it as a
willow tree.
and it grew and became a spreading vine of low stature whose
branches turned toward him and the roots thereof were under
him so it became a vine and brought forth branches and shot
forth sprigs.
there was also another great eagle with great wings and many
feathers and behold this vine did bend her roots toward
him and shot forth her branches toward him that he might
water it by the furrows of her plantation.
it was planted in a good soil by great waters that it might
bring forth branches and that it might bear fruit that it
might be a goodly vine.
say thou thus saith the lord God shall it prosper? shall he
not pull up the roots thereof and cut off the fruit thereof
that it wither? it shall wither in all the leaves of her
spring even without great power or many people to pluck it up
by the roots thereof.
yea behold being planted shall it prosper? shall it not
utterly wither when the east wind toucheth it? it shall
wither in the furrows where it grew.
moreover the word of the lord came unto me saying
say now to the rebellious house know ye not what these things
mean? tell them behold the king of Babylon is come to
Jerusalem and hath taken the king thereof and the princes
thereof and led them with him to Babylon
and hath taken of the king s seed and made a covenant with
him and hath taken an oath of him he hath also taken the
Mighty of the land
that the kingdom might be base that it might not lift itself
up but that by keeping of his covenant it might stand.
but he rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors into
Egypt that they might give him horses and Much people. shall
he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? or shall
he break the covenant and be delivered?
as I live saith the lord God surely in the place where the
king dwelleth that made him king whose oath he despised and
whose covenant he brake even with him in the midst of Babylon
he shall die.
Neither shall Pharaoh with his Mighty army and great company
make for him in the war by casting up mounts and building
forts to cut off many persons
seeing he despised the oath by breaking the covenant when
lo he had given his hand and hath done all these things he
shall not escape.
therefore thus saith the lord God as I live surely mine oath
that he hath despised and my covenant that he hath broken
even it will I recompense upon his own head.
and I will spread my net upon him and he shall be taken in my
snare and I will bring him to Babylon and will plead with
him there for his trespass that he hath trespassed against me.
and all his fugitives with all his Bands shall fall by the
sword and they that remain shall be scattered toward all
winds and ye shall know that I the lord have spoken it.
thus saith the lord God I will also take of the highest
branch of the high cedar and will set it I will crop off
from the top of his young twigs a tender one and will plant
it upon an high mountain and eminent
in the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it and
it shall bring forth boughs and bear fruit and be a goodly
cedar and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing in the
shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.
and all the trees of the field shall know that I the lord have
brought down the high tree have exalted the low tree have
dried up the green tree and have made the dry tree to
flourish I the lord have spoken and have done it.
the word of the lord came unto me again saying
what mean ye that ye use this proverb concerning the land of
Israel saying the fathers have eaten sour grapes and the
children s teeth are set on edge?
as I live saith the lord God ye shall not have occasion any
more to use this proverb in Israel.
behold all souls are mine as the soul of the father so also
the soul of the son is mine the soul that sinneth it shall
die.
but if a man be just and do that which is lawful and right
and hath not eaten upon the mountains Neither hath lifted up
his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel Neither hath
defiled his neighbour s wife Neither hath come near to a
menstruous woman
and hath not oppressed any but hath restored to the debtor
his pledge hath spoiled none by violence hath given his
bread to the hungry and hath covered the naked with a
garment
he that hath not given forth upon usury Neither hath taken
any increase that hath withdrawn his hand from iniquity hath
executed true judgment between man and man
hath walked in my statutes and hath kept my judgments to
deal truly he is just he shall surely live saith the lord
God.
if he beget a son that is a robber a shedder of blood and
that doeth the like to any one of these things
and that doeth not any of those duties but even hath eaten
upon the mountains and defiled his neighbour s wife
hath oppressed the poor and needy hath spoiled by violence
hath not restored the pledge and hath lifted up his eyes to
the idols hath committed abomination
hath given forth upon usury and hath taken increase shall he
then live? he shall not live he hath done all these
abominations he shall surely die his blood shall be upon
him.
now lo if he beget a son that seeth all his father s sins
which he hath done and considereth and doeth not such like
that hath not eaten upon the mountains Neither hath lifted up
his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel hath not defiled
his neighbour s wife
Neither hath oppressed any hath not withholden the pledge
Neither hath spoiled by violence but hath given his bread to
the hungry and hath covered the naked with a garment
that hath taken off his hand from the poor that hath not
received usury nor increase hath executed my judgments hath
walked in my statutes he shall not die for the iniquity of
his father he shall surely live.
as for his father because he cruelly oppressed spoiled his
brother by violence and did that which is not good among his
people lo even he shall die in his iniquity.
yet say ye why? doth not the son bear the iniquity of the
father? when the son hath done that which is lawful and right
and hath kept all my statutes and hath done them he shall
surely live.
the soul that sinneth it shall die. the son shall not bear
the iniquity of the father Neither shall the father bear the
iniquity of the son the righteousness of the righteous shall
be upon him and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
him.
but if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath
committed and keep all my statutes and do that which is
lawful and right he shall surely live he shall not die.
all his transgressions that he hath committed they shall not
be mentioned unto him in his righteousness that he hath done
he shall live.
have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith
the lord God and not that he should return from his ways and
live?
but when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness
and committeth iniquity and doeth according to all the
abominations that the wicked man doeth shall he live? all his
righteousness that he hath done shall not be mentioned in his
trespass that he hath trespassed and in his Sin that he hath
sinned in them shall he die.
yet ye say the way of the lord is not equal. hear now O
house of Israel is not my way equal? are not your ways
unequal?
when a righteous man turneth away from his righteousness and
committeth iniquity and dieth in them for his iniquity that
he hath done shall he die.
again when the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness
that he hath committed and doeth that which is lawful and
right he shall save his soul alive.
because he considereth and turneth away from all his
transgressions that he hath committed he shall surely live
he shall not die.
yet saith the house of Israel the way of the lord is not
equal. O house of Israel are not my ways equal? are not your
ways unequal?
therefore I will judge you O house of Israel every one
according to his ways saith the lord God. repent and turn
yourselves from all your transgressions so iniquity shall not
be your ruin.
cast away from you all your transgressions whereby ye have
transgressed and make you a new heart and a new spirit for
why will ye die O house of Israel?
for I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth saith
the lord God wherefore turn yourselves and live ye.
moreover take thou up a lamentation for the princes of Israel
and say what is thy mother? a lioness she lay down among
lions she nourished her whelps among young lions.
and she brought up one of her whelps it became a young lion
and it learned to catch the prey it devoured men.
the nations also heard of him he was taken in their pit and
they brought him with chains unto the land of Egypt.
now when she saw that she had waited and her hope was lost
then she took another of her whelps and made him a young
lion.
and he went up and down among the lions he became a young
lion and learned to catch the prey and devoured men.
and he knew their desolate palaces and he laid waste their
cities and the land was desolate and the fulness thereof by
the noise of his roaring.
then the nations set against him on every side from the
provinces and spread their net over him he was taken in
their pit.
and they put him in ward in chains and brought him to the
king of Babylon they brought him into holds that his voice
should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel.
thy mother is like a vine in thy blood planted by the waters
she was fruitful and full of branches by reason of many
waters.
and she had strong rods for the sceptres of them that bare
rule and her stature was exalted among the thick branches
and she appeared in her height with the multitude of her
branches.
but she was plucked up in fury she was cast down to the
ground and the east wind dried up her fruit her strong rods
were broken and withered the fire consumed them.
and now she is planted in the wilderness in a dry and thirsty
ground.
and fire is gone out of a rod of her branches which hath
devoured her fruit so that she hath no strong rod to be a
sceptre to rule. this is a lamentation and shall be for a
lamentation.
and it came to pass in the seventh year in the fifth month
the tenth day of the month that certain of the elders of
Israel came to enquire of the lord and sat before me.
then came the word of the lord unto me saying
son of man speak unto the elders of Israel and say unto
them thus saith the lord God are ye come to enquire of me?
as I live saith the lord God I will not be enquired of by
you.
wilt thou judge them son of man wilt thou judge them? cause
them to know the abominations of their fathers
and say unto them thus saith the lord God in the day when I
chose Israel and lifted up mine hand unto the seed of the
house of Jacob and made myself known unto them in the land of
Egypt when I lifted up mine hand unto them saying I Am the
lord your God
in the day that I lifted up mine hand unto them to bring them
forth of the land of Egypt into a land that I had espied for
them flowing with milk and honey which is the glory of all
lands
then said I unto them cast ye away every man the abominations
of his eyes and defile not yourselves with the idols of
Egypt I Am the lord your God.
but they rebelled against me and would not hearken unto me
they did not every man cast away the abominations of their
eyes Neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt then I
said I will pour out my fury upon them to accomplish my
anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt.
but I wrought for my name s sake that it should not be
polluted before the heathen among whom they were in whose
sight I made myself known unto them in bringing them forth
out of the land of Egypt.
wherefore I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt
and brought them into the wilderness.
and I gave them my statutes and shewed them my judgments
which if a man do he shall even live in them.
moreover also I gave them my sabbaths to be a sign between me
and them that they might know that I Am the lord that
sanctify them.
but the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness
they walked not in my statutes and they despised my
judgments which if a man do he shall even live in them and
my sabbaths they greatly polluted then I said I would pour
out my fury upon them in the wilderness to consume them.
but I wrought for my name s sake that it should not be
polluted before the heathen in whose sight I brought them
out.
yet also I lifted up my hand unto them in the wilderness that
I would not bring them into the land which I had given them
flowing with milk and honey which is the glory of all lands
because they despised my judgments and walked not in my
statutes but polluted my sabbaths for their heart went after
their idols.
nevertheless mine eye spared them from destroying them
Neither did I make an end of them in the wilderness.
but I said unto their children in the wilderness walk ye not
in the statutes of your fathers Neither observe their
judgments nor defile yourselves with their idols
I Am the lord your God walk in my statutes and keep my
judgments and do them
and hallow my sabbaths and they shall be a sign between me
and you that ye may know that I Am the lord your God.
notwithstanding the children rebelled against me they walked
not in my statutes Neither kept my judgments to do them
which if a man do he shall even live in them they polluted
my sabbaths then I said I would pour out my fury upon them
to accomplish my anger against them in the wilderness.
nevertheless I withdrew mine hand and wrought for my name s
sake that it should not be polluted in the sight of the
heathen in whose sight I brought them forth.
I lifted up mine hand unto them also in the wilderness that I
would scatter them among the heathen and disperse them
through the countries
because they had not executed my judgments but had despised
my statutes and had polluted my sabbaths and their eyes were
after their fathers idols.
wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good and
judgments whereby they should not live
and I polluted them in their own gifts in that they caused to
pass through the fire all that openeth the womb that I might
make them desolate to the end that they might know that I Am
the lord.
therefore son of man speak unto the house of Israel and say
unto them thus saith the lord God yet in this your fathers
have blasphemed me in that they have committed a trespass
against me.
for when I had brought them into the land for the which I
lifted up mine hand to give it to them then they saw every
high hill and all the thick trees and they offered there
their sacrifices and there they presented the provocation of
their offering there also they made their sweet savour and
poured out there their drink offerings.
then I said unto them what is the high place whereunto ye go?
and the name whereof is called Bamah unto this day.
wherefore say unto the house of Israel thus saith the lord
God are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and
commit ye whoredom after their abominations?
for when ye offer your gifts when ye make your sons to pass
through the fire ye pollute yourselves with all your idols
even unto this day and shall I be enquired of by you O house
of Israel? as I live saith the lord God I will not be
enquired of by you.
and that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all that
ye say we will be as the heathen as the families of the
countries to serve wood and stone.
as I live saith the lord God surely with a Mighty hand and
with a stretched out arm and with fury poured out will I
rule over you
and I will bring you out from the people and will gather you
out of the countries wherein ye are scattered with a Mighty
hand and with a stretched out arm and with fury poured out.
and I will bring you into the wilderness of the people and
there will I plead with you face to face.
like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the
land of Egypt so will I plead with you saith the lord God.
and I will cause you to pass under the rod and I will bring
you into the bond of the covenant
and I will purge out from among you the rebels and them that
transgress against me I will bring them forth out of the
country where they Sojourn and they shall not enter into the
land of Israel and ye shall know that I Am the lord.
as for you O house of Israel thus saith the lord God go ye
serve ye every one his idols and hereafter also if ye will
not hearken unto me but pollute ye my holy name no more with
your gifts and with your idols.
for in mine holy mountain in the mountain of the height of
Israel saith the lord God there shall all the house of
Israel all of them in the land serve me there will I accept
them and there will I require your offerings and the
firstfruits of your oblations with all your holy things.
I will accept you with your sweet savour when I bring you out
from the people and gather you out of the countries wherein
ye have been scattered and I will be sanctified in you before
the heathen.
and ye shall know that I Am the lord when I shall bring you
into the land of Israel into the country for the which I
lifted up mine hand to give it to your fathers.
and there shall ye remember your ways and all your doings
wherein ye have been defiled and ye shall lothe yourselves in
your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed.
and ye shall know that I Am the lord when I have wrought with
you for my name s sake not according to your wicked ways nor
according to your corrupt doings O ye house of Israel saith
the lord God.
moreover the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man set thy face toward the south and drop thy word
toward the south and prophesy against the forest of the south
field
and say to the forest of the south hear the word of the lord
thus saith the lord God behold I will kindle a fire in thee
and it shall devour every green tree in thee and every dry
tree the flaming flame shall not be quenched and all faces
from the south to the north shall be burned therein.
and all flesh shall see that I the lord have kindled it it
shall not be quenched.
then said I ah lord God they say of me doth he not speak
parables?
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man set thy face toward Jerusalem and drop thy word
toward the holy places and prophesy against the land of
Israel
and say to the land of Israel thus saith the lord behold I
Am against thee and will draw forth my sword out of his
sheath and will cut off from thee the righteous and the
wicked.
seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and
the wicked therefore shall my sword go forth out of his
sheath against all flesh from the south to the north
that all flesh may know that I the lord have drawn forth my
sword out of his sheath it shall not return any more.
Sigh therefore thou son of man with the breaking of thy
loins and with bitterness Sigh before their eyes.
and it shall be when they say unto thee wherefore sighest
thou? that thou shalt answer for the tidings because it
cometh and every heart shall melt and all hands shall be
feeble and every spirit shall faint and all knees shall be
weak as water behold it cometh and shall be brought to
pass saith the lord God.
again the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man prophesy and say thus saith the lord say a
sword a sword is sharpened and also furbished
it is sharpened to make a sore slaughter it is furbished that
it may glitter should we then make mirth? it contemneth the
rod of my son as every tree.
and he hath given it to be furbished that it may be handled
this sword is sharpened and it is furbished to give it into
the hand of the slayer.
cry and howl son of man for it shall be upon my people it
shall be upon all the princes of Israel terrors by reason of
the sword shall be upon my people smite therefore upon thy
thigh.
because it is a trial and what if the sword contemn even the
rod? it shall be no more saith the lord God.
thou therefore son of man prophesy and smite thine hands
together and let the sword be doubled the third time the
sword of the slain it is the sword of the great men that are
slain which entereth into their privy chambers.
I have set the point of the sword against all their gates
that their heart may faint and their ruins be multiplied ah
it is made bright it is wrapped up for the slaughter.
go thee one way or other either on the right hand or on the
left whithersoever thy face is set.
I will also smite mine hands together and I will cause my
fury to rest I the lord have said it.
the word of the lord came unto me again saying
also thou son of man appoint thee two ways that the sword
of the king of Babylon may come both twain shall come forth
out of one land and choose thou a place choose it at the
head of the way to the city.
appoint a way that the sword may come to Rabbath of the
Ammonites and to Judah in Jerusalem the defenced.
for the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way at
the head of the two ways to use divination he made his
arrows bright he consulted with images he looked in the
liver.
at his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem to appoint
captains to open the mouth in the slaughter to lift up the
voice with shouting to appoint battering rams against the
gates to cast a mount and to build a fort.
and it shall be unto them as a false divination in their
sight to them that have sworn oaths but he will call to
remembrance the iniquity that they may be taken.
therefore thus saith the lord God because ye have made your
iniquity to be remembered in that your transgressions are
discovered so that in all your doings your sins do appear
because I say that ye are come to remembrance ye shall be
taken with the hand.
and thou profane wicked prince of Israel whose day is come
when iniquity shall have an end
thus saith the lord God remove the diadem and take off the
crown this shall not be the same exalt him that is low and
abase him that is high.
I will overturn overturn overturn it and it shall be no
more until he come whose right it is and I will give it him.
and thou son of man prophesy and say thus saith the lord
God concerning the Ammonites and concerning their reproach
even say thou the sword the sword is drawn for the
slaughter it is furbished to consume because of the
glittering
whiles they see vanity unto thee whiles they divine a lie
unto thee to bring thee upon the necks of them that are
slain of the wicked whose day is come when their iniquity
shall have an end.
shall I cause it to return into his sheath? I will judge thee
in the place where thou wast created in the land of thy
nativity.
and I will pour out mine indignation upon thee I will blow
against thee in the fire of my wrath and deliver thee into
the hand of brutish men and skilful to destroy.
thou shalt be for fuel to the fire thy blood shall be in the
midst of the land thou shalt be no more remembered for I the
lord have spoken it.
moreover the word of the lord came unto me saying
now thou son of man wilt thou judge wilt thou judge the
bloody city? yea thou shalt shew her all her abominations.
then say thou thus saith the lord God the city sheddeth
blood in the midst of it that her time may come and maketh
idols against herself to defile herself.
thou art become guilty in thy blood that thou hast shed and
hast defiled thyself in thine idols which thou hast made and
thou hast caused thy days to draw near and art come even unto
thy years therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the
heathen and a mocking to all countries.
those that be near and those that be far from thee shall
mock thee which art infamous and Much vexed.
behold the princes of Israel every one were in thee to their
power to shed blood.
in thee have they set light by father and mother in the midst
of thee have they dealt by oppression with the stranger in
thee have they vexed the fatherless and the widow.
thou hast despised mine holy things and hast profaned my
sabbaths.
in thee are men that carry tales to shed blood and in thee
they eat upon the mountains in the midst of thee they commit
lewdness.
in thee have they discovered their fathers nakedness in thee
have they humbled her that was set apart for pollution.
and one hath committed abomination with his neighbour s wife
and another hath lewdly defiled his daughter in law and
another in thee hath humbled his sister his father s
daughter.
in thee have they taken gifts to shed blood thou hast taken
usury and increase and thou hast greedily gained of thy
neighbours by extortion and hast forgotten me saith the lord
God.
behold therefore I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest
gain which thou hast made and at thy blood which hath been in
the midst of thee.
can thine heart endure or can thine hands be strong in the
days that I shall deal with thee? I the lord have spoken it
and will do it.
and I will scatter thee among the heathen and disperse thee
in the countries and will consume thy filthiness out of thee.
and thou shalt take thine inheritance in thyself in the sight
of the heathen and thou shalt know that I Am the lord.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man the house of Israel is to me become dross all
they are brass and tin and Iron and lead in the midst of
the furnace they are even the dross of Silver.
therefore thus saith the lord God because ye are all become
dross behold therefore I will gather you into the midst of
Jerusalem.
as they gather Silver and brass and Iron and lead and tin
into the midst of the furnace to blow the fire upon it to
melt it so will I gather you in mine anger and in my fury
and I will leave you there and melt you.
yea I will gather you and blow upon you in the fire of my
wrath and ye shall be melted in the midst therof.
as Silver is melted in the midst of the furnace so shall ye
be melted in the midst thereof and ye shall know that I the
lord have poured out my fury upon you.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man say unto her thou art the land that is not
cleansed nor rained upon in the day of indignation.
there is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof
like a roaring lion ravening the prey they have devoured
souls they have taken the treasure and precious things they
have made her many widows in the midst thereof.
her priests have violated my law and have profaned mine holy
things they have put no difference between the holy and
profane Neither have they shewed difference between the
unclean and the clean and have hid their eyes from my
sabbaths and I Am profaned among them.
her princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the
prey to shed blood and to destroy souls to get dishonest
gain.
and her prophets have daubed them with untempered morter
seeing vanity and divining lies unto them saying thus saith
the lord God when the lord hath not spoken.
the people of the land have used oppression and exercised
robbery and have vexed the poor and needy yea they have
oppressed the stranger wrongfully.
and I sought for a man among them that should make up the
hedge and stand in the gap before me for the land that I
should not destroy it but I found none.
therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them I have
consumed them with the fire of my wrath their own way have I
recompensed upon their heads saith the lord God.
the word of the lord came again unto me saying
son of man there were two women the daughters of one mother
and they committed whoredoms in Egypt they committed
whoredoms in their youth there were their breasts pressed
and there they bruised the teats of their virginity.
and the names of them were Aholah the elder and Aholibah her
sister and they were mine and they bare sons and daughters.
thus were their names Samaria is Aholah and Jerusalem
Aholibah.
and Aholah played the harlot when she was mine and she doted
on her lovers on the Assyrians her neighbours
which were clothed with blue captains and rulers all of them
desirable young men horsemen riding upon horses.
thus she committed her whoredoms with them with all them that
were the chosen men of Assyria and with all on whom she
doted with all their idols she defiled herself.
Neither left she her whoredoms brought from Egypt for in her
youth they lay with her and they bruised the breasts of her
virginity and poured their whoredom upon her.
wherefore I have delivered her into the hand of her lovers
into the hand of the Assyrians upon whom she doted.
these discovered her nakedness they took her sons and her
daughters and slew her with the sword and she became famous
among women for they had executed judgment upon her.
and when her sister Aholibah saw this she was more corrupt in
her inordinate love than she and in her whoredoms more than
her sister in her whoredoms.
she doted upon the Assyrians her neighbours captains and
rulers clothed most gorgeously horsemen riding upon horses
all of them desirable young men.
then I saw that she was defiled that they took both one way
and that she increased her whoredoms for when she saw men
pourtrayed upon the wall the images of the Chaldeans
pourtrayed with vermilion
girded with girdles upon their loins exceeding in dyed attire
upon their heads all of them princes to look to after the
manner of the Babylonians of Chaldea the land of their
nativity
and as soon as she saw them with her eyes she doted upon
them and sent messengers unto them into Chaldea.
and the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love and they
defiled her with their whoredom and she was polluted with
them and her mind was alienated from them.
so she discovered her whoredoms and discovered her nakedness
then my mind was alienated from her like as my mind was
alienated from her sister.
yet she multiplied her whoredoms in calling to remembrance
the days of her youth wherein she had played the harlot in
the land of Egypt.
for she doted upon their paramours whose flesh is as the
flesh of asses and whose issue is like the issue of horses.
thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth
in bruising thy teats by the Egyptians for the paps of thy
youth.
therefore O Aholibah thus saith the lord God behold I will
raise up thy lovers against thee from whom thy mind is
alienated and I will bring them against thee on every side
the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans Pekod and Shoa and
Koa and all the Assyrians with them all of them desirable
young men captains and rulers great lords and renowned all
of them riding upon horses.
and they shall come against thee with chariots wagons and
wheels and with an assembly of people which shall set
against thee buckler and shield and helmet round about and I
will set judgment before them and they shall judge thee
according to their judgments.
and I will set my jealousy against thee and they shall deal
furiously with thee they shall take away thy nose and thine
ears and thy remnant shall fall by the sword they shall take
thy sons and thy daughters and thy residue shall be devoured
by the fire.
they shall also strip thee out of thy clothes and take away
thy fair jewels.
thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee and thy
whoredom brought from the land of Egypt so that thou shalt
not lift up thine eyes unto them nor remember Egypt any more.
for thus saith the lord God behold I will deliver thee into
the hand of them whom thou hatest into the hand of them from
whom thy mind is alienated
and they shall deal with thee hatefully and shall take away
all thy labour and shall leave thee naked and bare and the
nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered both thy
lewdness and thy whoredoms.
I will do these things unto thee because thou hast gone a
whoring after the heathen and because thou art polluted with
their idols.
thou hast walked in the way of thy sister therefore will I
give her cup into thine hand.
thus saith the lord God thou shalt drink of thy sister s cup
deep and large thou shalt be laughed to scorn and had in
derision it containeth Much.
thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow with the cup
of astonishment and desolation with the cup of thy sister
Samaria.
thou shalt even drink it and suck it out and thou shalt break
the sherds thereof and pluck off thine own breasts for I
have spoken it saith the lord God.
therefore thus saith the lord God because thou hast forgotten
me and cast me behind thy back therefore bear thou also thy
lewdness and thy whoredoms.
the lord said moreover unto me son of man wilt thou judge
Aholah and Aholibah? yea declare unto them their
abominations
that they have committed adultery and blood is in their
hands and with their idols have they committed adultery and
have also caused their sons whom they bare unto me to pass
for them through the fire to devour them.
moreover this they have done unto me they have defiled my
sanctuary in the same day and have profaned my sabbaths.
for when they had slain their children to their idols then
they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it and
lo thus have they done in the midst of mine house.
and furthermore that ye have sent for men to come from far
unto whom a messenger was sent and lo they came for whom
thou didst wash thyself paintedst thy eyes and deckedst
thyself with ornaments
and satest upon a stately bed and a table prepared before it
whereupon thou hast set mine incense and mine oil.
and a voice of a multitude being at ease was with her and
with the men of the common sort were brought Sabeans from the
wilderness which put bracelets upon their hands and
beautiful crowns upon their heads.
then said I unto her that was old in adulteries will they now
commit whoredoms with her and she with them?
yet they went in unto her as they go in unto a woman that
playeth the harlot so went they in unto Aholah and unto
Aholibah the lewd women.
and the righteous men they shall judge them after the manner
of adulteresses and after the manner of women that shed
blood because they are adulteresses and blood is in their
hands.
for thus saith the lord God I will bring up a company upon
them and will give them to be removed and spoiled.
and the company shall stone them with stones and dispatch
them with their swords they shall slay their sons and their
daughters and burn up their houses with fire.
thus will I cause lewdness to cease out of the land that all
women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.
and they shall recompense your lewdness upon you and ye shall
bear the sins of your idols and ye shall know that I Am the
lord God.
again in the ninth year in the tenth month in the tenth day
of the month the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man write thee the name of the day even of this same
day the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this
same day.
and utter a parable unto the rebellious house and say unto
them thus saith the lord God set on a pot set it on and
also pour water into it
gather the pieces thereof into it even every good piece the
thigh and the shoulder fill it with the choice bones.
take the choice of the flock and burn also the bones under
it and make it boil well and let them seethe the bones of it
therein.
wherefore thus saith the lord God woe to the bloody city to
the pot whose scum is therein and whose scum is not gone out
of it bring it out piece by piece let no Lot fall upon it.
for her blood is in the midst of her she set it upon the top
of a rock she poured it not upon the ground to cover it with
dust
that it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance I have
set her blood upon the top of a rock that it should not be
covered.
therefore thus saith the lord God woe to the bloody city I
will even make the pile for fire great.
heap on wood kindle the fire consume the flesh and spice it
well and let the bones be burned.
then set it empty upon the coals thereof that the brass of it
may be hot and may burn and that the filthiness of it may be
molten in it that the scum of it may be consumed.
she hath wearied herself with lies and her great scum went
not forth out of her her scum shall be in the fire.
in thy filthiness is lewdness because I have purged thee and
thou wast not purged thou shalt not be purged from thy
filthiness any more till I have caused my fury to rest upon
thee.
I the lord have spoken it it shall come to pass and I will
do it I will not go back Neither will I spare Neither will
I repent according to thy ways and according to thy doings
shall they judge thee saith the lord God.
also the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man behold I take away from thee the desire of thine
eyes with a stroke yet Neither shalt thou mourn nor weep
Neither shall thy tears run down.
forbear to cry make no mourning for the dead bind the tire
of thine head upon thee and put on thy shoes upon thy feet
and cover not thy lips and eat not the bread of men.
so I spake unto the people in the morning and at even my wife
died and I did in the morning as I was commanded.
and the people said unto me wilt thou not tell us what these
things are to us that thou doest so?
then I answered them the word of the lord came unto me
saying
speak unto the house of Israel thus saith the lord God
behold I will profane my sanctuary the excellency of your
strength the desire of your eyes and that which your soul
pitieth and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left
shall fall by the sword.
and ye shall do as I have done ye shall not cover your lips
nor eat the bread of men.
and your tires shall be upon your heads and your shoes upon
your feet ye shall not mourn nor weep but ye shall pine away
for your iniquities and mourn one toward another.
thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign according to all that he hath
done shall ye do and when this cometh ye shall know that I
Am the lord God.
also thou son of man shall it not be in the day when I take
from them their strength the joy of their glory the desire
of their eyes and that whereupon they set their minds their
sons and their daughters
that he that escapeth in that day shall come unto thee to
cause thee to hear it with thine ears?
in that day shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped
and thou shalt speak and be no more dumb and thou shalt be a
sign unto them and they shall know that I Am the lord.
the word of the lord came again unto me saying
son of man set thy face against the Ammonites and prophesy
against them
and say unto the Ammonites hear the word of the lord God
thus saith the lord God because thou saidst aha against my
sanctuary when it was profaned and against the land of
Israel when it was desolate and against the house of Judah
when they went into captivity
behold therefore I will deliver thee to the men of the east
for a possession and they shall set their palaces in thee
and make their dwellings in thee they shall eat thy fruit
and they shall drink thy milk.
and I will make Rabbah a stable for camels and the Ammonites
a couching place for flocks and ye shall know that I Am the
lord.
for thus saith the lord God because thou hast clapped thine
hands and stamped with the feet and rejoiced in heart with
all thy despite against the land of Israel
behold therefore I will stretch out mine hand upon thee and
will deliver thee for a spoil to the heathen and I will cut
thee off from the people and I will cause thee to perish out
of the countries I will destroy thee and thou shalt know
that I Am the lord.
thus saith the lord God because that Moab and Seir do say
behold the house of Judah is like unto all the heathen
therefore behold I will open the side of Moab from the
cities from his cities which are on his frontiers the glory
of the country Bethjeshimoth Baalmeon and Kiriathaim
unto the men of the east with the Ammonites and will give
them in possession that the Ammonites may not be remembered
among the nations.
and I will execute judgments upon Moab and they shall know
that I Am the lord.
thus saith the lord God because that Edom hath dealt against
the house of Judah by taking vengeance and hath greatly
offended and revenged himself upon them
therefore thus saith the lord God I will also stretch out
mine hand upon Edom and will cut off man and beast from it
and I will make it desolate from Teman and they of Dedan
shall fall by the sword.
and I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people
Israel and they shall do in Edom according to mine anger and
according to my fury and they shall know my vengeance saith
the lord God.
thus saith the lord God because the Philistines have dealt by
revenge and have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart to
destroy it for the old hatred
therefore thus saith the lord God behold I will stretch out
mine hand upon the Philistines and I will cut off the
Cherethims and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.
and I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious
rebukes and they shall know that I Am the lord when I shall
lay my vengeance upon them.
and it came to pass in the eleventh year in the first day of
the month that the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man because that Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem
aha she is broken that was the gates of the people she is
turned unto me I shall be replenished now she is laid waste
therefore thus saith the lord God behold I Am against thee
O Tyrus and will cause many nations to come up against thee
as the sea causeth his waves to come up.
and they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus and break down her
towers I will also scrape her dust from her and make her
like the top of a rock.
it shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of
the sea for I have spoken it saith the lord God and it
shall become a spoil to the nations.
and her daughters which are in the field shall be slain by the
sword and they shall know that I Am the lord.
for thus saith the lord God behold I will bring upon Tyrus
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon a king of kings from the
north with horses and with chariots and with horsemen and
companies and Much people.
he shall slay with the sword thy daughters in the field and
he shall make a fort against thee and cast a mount against
thee and lift up the buckler against thee.
and he shall set engines of war against thy walls and with
his axes he shall break down thy towers.
by reason of the abundance of his horses their dust shall
cover thee thy walls shall shake at the noise of the
horsemen and of the wheels and of the chariots when he
shall enter into thy gates as men enter into a city wherein
is made a breach.
with the hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy
streets he shall slay thy people by the sword and thy strong
garrisons shall go down to the ground.
and they shall make a spoil of thy Riches and make a prey of
thy merchandise and they shall break down thy walls and
destroy thy pleasant houses and they shall lay thy stones and
thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the water.
and I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease and the
sound of thy harps shall be no more heard.
and I will make thee like the top of a rock thou shalt be a
place to spread nets upon thou shalt be built no more for I
the lord have spoken it saith the lord God.
thus saith the lord God to Tyrus shall not the isles shake at
the sound of thy fall when the wounded cry when the
slaughter is made in the midst of thee?
then all the princes of the sea shall come down from their
thrones and lay away their robes and put off their broidered
garments they shall clothe themselves with trembling they
shall sit upon the ground and shall tremble at every moment
and be astonished at thee.
and they shall take up a lamentation for thee and say to
thee how art thou destroyed that wast inhabited of seafaring
men the renowned city which wast strong in the sea she and
her inhabitants which cause their terror to be on all that
haunt it
now shall the isles tremble in the day of thy fall yea the
isles that are in the sea shall be troubled at thy departure.
for thus saith the lord God when I shall make thee a desolate
city like the cities that are not inhabited when I shall
bring up the deep upon thee and great waters shall cover
thee
when I shall bring thee down with them that descend into the
pit with the people of old time and shall set thee in the
low parts of the earth in places desolate of old with them
that go down to the pit that thou be not inhabited and I
shall set glory in the land of the living
I will make thee a terror and thou shalt be no more though
thou be sought for yet shalt thou never be found again saith
the lord God.
the word of the lord came again unto me saying
now thou son of man take up a lamentation for Tyrus
and say unto Tyrus O thou that art situate at the entry of
the sea which art a merchant of the people for many isles
thus saith the lord God O Tyrus thou hast said I Am of
perfect beauty.
thy borders are in the midst of the seas thy builders have
perfected thy beauty.
they have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of Senir they
have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee.
of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars the company
of the Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory brought out
of the isles of Chittim.
fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou
spreadest forth to be thy sail blue and purple from the isles
of Elishah was that which covered thee.
the inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy mariners thy wise
men O Tyrus that were in thee were thy pilots.
the ancients of Gebal and the wise men thereof were in thee
thy calkers all the ships of the sea with their mariners were
in thee to occupy thy merchandise.
they of Persia and of Lud and of Phut were in thine army thy
men of war they hanged the shield and helmet in thee they
set forth thy comeliness.
the men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round
about and the Gammadims were in thy towers they hanged their
shields upon thy walls round about they have made thy beauty
perfect.
Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all
kind of Riches with Silver Iron tin and lead they traded
in thy fairs.
Javan Tubal and Meshech they were thy merchants they
traded the persons of men and vessels of brass in thy market.
they of the house of Togarmah traded in thy fairs with horses
and horsemen and mules.
the men of Dedan were thy merchants many isles were the
merchandise of thine hand they brought thee for a present
horns of ivory and ebony.
Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares
of thy making they occupied in thy fairs with emeralds
purple and broidered work and fine linen and coral and
agate.
Judah and the land of Israel they were thy merchants they
traded in thy market wheat of Minnith and Pannag and honey
and oil and balm.
Damascus was thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy
making for the multitude of all Riches in the wine of
Helbon and white wool.
Dan also and Javan going to and fro occupied in thy fairs
bright Iron cassia and calamus were in thy market.
Dedan was thy merchant in precious clothes for chariots.
Arabia and all the princes of Kedar they occupied with thee
in lambs and rams and goats in these were they thy
merchants.
the merchants of Sheba and Raamah they were thy merchants
they occupied in thy fairs with chief of all spices and with
all precious stones and gold.
Haran and Canneh and Eden the merchants of Sheba Asshur
and Chilmad were thy merchants.
these were thy merchants in all sorts of things in blue
clothes and broidered work and in chests of rich apparel
bound with cords and made of cedar among thy merchandise.
the ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy market and thou
wast replenished and made very glorious in the midst of the
seas.
thy rowers have brought thee into great waters the east wind
hath broken thee in the midst of the seas.
thy Riches and thy fairs thy merchandise thy mariners and
thy pilots thy calkers and the occupiers of thy merchandise
and all thy men of war that are in thee and in all thy
company which is in the midst of thee shall fall into the
midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin.
the suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots.
and all that handle the oar the mariners and all the pilots
of the sea shall come down from their ships they shall stand
upon the land
and shall cause their voice to be heard against thee and
shall cry bitterly and shall cast up dust upon their heads
they shall wallow themselves in the ashes
and they shall make themselves utterly bald for thee and gird
them with sackcloth and they shall weep for thee with
bitterness of heart and bitter wailing.
and in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for
thee and lament over thee saying what city is like Tyrus
like the destroyed in the midst of the sea?
when thy wares went forth out of the seas thou filledst many
people thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the
multitude of thy Riches and of thy merchandise.
in the time when thou shalt be broken by the seas in the
depths of the waters thy merchandise and all thy company in
the midst of thee shall fall.
all the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee
and their kings shall be sore afraid they shall be troubled
in their countenance.
the merchants among the people shall hiss at thee thou shalt
be a terror and never shalt be any more.
the word of the lord came again unto me saying
son of man say unto the prince of Tyrus thus saith the lord
God because thine heart is lifted up and thou hast said I
Am a God I sit in the seat of God in the midst of the seas
yet thou art a man and not God though thou set thine heart
as the heart of God
behold thou art wiser than Daniel there is no secret that
they can hide from thee
with thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast gotten
thee Riches and hast gotten gold and Silver into thy
treasures
by thy great wisdom and by thy traffick hast thou increased
thy Riches and thine heart is lifted up because of thy
Riches
therefore thus saith the lord God because thou hast set thine
heart as the heart of God
behold therefore I will bring strangers upon thee the
terrible of the nations and they shall draw their swords
against the beauty of thy wisdom and they shall defile thy
brightness.
they shall bring thee down to the pit and thou shalt die the
deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the seas.
wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee I Am God? but
thou shalt be a man and no God in the hand of him that
slayeth thee.
thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by the hand of
strangers for I have spoken it saith the lord God.
moreover the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus and
say unto him thus saith the lord God thou sealest up the
sum full of wisdom and perfect in beauty.
thou hast been in Eden the garden of God every precious stone
was thy covering the sardius topaz and the diamond the
beryl the Onyx and the jasper the sapphire the emerald
and the carbuncle and gold the workmanship of thy tabrets
and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou
wast created.
thou art the anointed Cherub that covereth and I have set
thee so thou wast upon the holy mountain of God thou hast
walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.
thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast
created till iniquity was found in thee.
by the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst
of thee with violence and thou hast sinned therefore I will
cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God and I will
destroy thee O covering Cherub from the midst of the stones
of fire.
thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty thou hast
corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness I will cast
thee to the ground I will lay thee before kings that they
may behold thee.
thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine
iniquities by the iniquity of thy traffick therefore will I
bring forth a fire from the midst of thee it shall devour
thee and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the
sight of all them that behold thee.
all they that know thee among the people shall be astonished
at thee thou shalt be a terror and never shalt thou be any
more.
again the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man set thy face against Zidon and prophesy against
it
and say thus saith the lord God behold I Am against thee O
Zidon and I will be glorified in the midst of thee and they
shall know that I Am the lord when I shall have executed
judgments in her and shall be sanctified in her.
for I will send into her pestilence and blood into her
streets and the wounded shall be judged in the midst of her
by the sword upon her on every side and they shall know that
I Am the lord.
and there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of
Israel nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about
them that despised them and they shall know that I Am the
lord God.
thus saith the lord God when I shall have gathered the house
of Israel from the people among whom they are scattered and
shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen then
shall they dwell in their land that I have given to my servant
Jacob.
and they shall dwell safely therein and shall build houses
and plant vineyards yea they shall dwell with confidence
when I have executed judgments upon all those that despise
them round about them and they shall know that I Am the lord
their God.
in the tenth year in the tenth month in the twelfth day of
the month the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt and
prophesy against him and against all Egypt
speak and say thus saith the lord God behold I Am against
thee Pharaoh king of Egypt the great dragon that lieth in
the midst of his rivers which hath said my river is mine
own and I have made it for myself.
but I will put hooks in thy jaws and I will cause the fish of
thy rivers to stick unto thy scales and I will bring thee up
out of the midst of thy rivers and all the fish of thy rivers
shall stick unto thy scales.
and I will leave thee thrown into the wilderness thee and all
the fish of thy rivers thou shalt fall upon the open fields
thou shalt not be brought together nor gathered I have given
thee for meat to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of
the heaven.
and all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I Am the
lord because they have been a staff of reed to the house of
Israel.
when they took hold of thee by thy hand thou didst break and
rend all their shoulder and when they leaned upon thee thou
brakest and madest all their loins to be at a stand.
therefore thus saith the lord God behold I will bring a
sword upon thee and cut off man and beast out of thee.
and the land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste and they
shall know that I Am the lord because he hath said the river
is mine and I have made it.
behold therefore I Am against thee and against thy rivers
and I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste and desolate
from the tower of Syene even unto the border of Ethiopia.
no foot of man shall pass through it nor foot of beast shall
pass through it Neither shall it be inhabited forty years.
and I will make the land of Egypt desolate in the midst of the
countries that are desolate and her cities among the cities
that are laid waste shall be desolate forty years and I will
scatter the Egyptians among the nations and will disperse
them through the countries.
yet thus saith the lord God at the end of forty years will I
gather the Egyptians from the people whither they were
scattered
and I will bring again the captivity of Egypt and will cause
them to return into the land of Pathros into the land of
their habitation and they shall be there a base kingdom.
it shall be the basest of the kingdoms Neither shall it exalt
itself any more above the nations for I will diminish them
that they shall no more rule over the nations.
and it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel
which bringeth their iniquity to remembrance when they shall
look after them but they shall know that I Am the lord God.
and it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year in the
first month in the first day of the month the word of the
lord came unto me saying
son of man Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon caused his army to
serve a great service against Tyrus every head was made bald
and every shoulder was peeled yet had he no wages nor his
army for Tyrus for the service that he had served against
it
therefore thus saith the lord God behold I will give the
land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and he
shall take her multitude and take her spoil and take her
prey and it shall be the wages for his army.
I have given him the land of Egypt for his labour wherewith he
served against it because they wrought for me saith the lord
God.
in that day will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to
bud forth and I will give thee the opening of the mouth in
the midst of them and they shall know that I Am the lord.
the word of the lord came again unto me saying
son of man prophesy and say thus saith the lord God howl
ye woe worth the day
for the day is near even the day of the lord is near a
cloudy day it shall be the time of the heathen.
and the sword shall come upon Egypt and great pain shall be
in Ethiopia when the slain shall fall in Egypt and they
shall take away her multitude and her foundations shall be
broken down.
Ethiopia and Libya and Lydia and all the mingled people
and Chub and the men of the land that is in league shall
fall with them by the sword.
thus saith the lord they also that uphold Egypt shall fall
and the pride of her power shall come down from the tower of
Syene shall they fall in it by the sword saith the lord God.
and they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that
are desolate and her cities shall be in the midst of the
cities that are wasted.
and they shall know that I Am the lord when I have set a fire
in Egypt and when all her helpers shall be destroyed.
in that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships to make
the careless Ethiopians afraid and great pain shall come upon
them as in the day of Egypt for lo it cometh.
thus saith the lord God I will also make the multitude of
Egypt to cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.
he and his people with him the terrible of the nations shall
be brought to destroy the land and they shall draw their
swords against Egypt and fill the land with the slain.
and I will make the rivers dry and sell the land into the
hand of the wicked and I will make the land waste and all
that is therein by the hand of strangers I the lord have
spoken it.
thus saith the lord God I will also destroy the idols and I
will cause their images to cease out of Noph and there shall
be no more a prince of the land of Egypt and I will put a
fear in the land of Egypt.
and I will make Pathros desolate and will set fire in Zoan
and will execute judgments in no.
and I will pour my fury upon Sin the strength of Egypt and I
will cut off the multitude of no.
and I will set fire in Egypt Sin shall have great pain and
no shall be rent asunder and Noph shall have distresses
daily.
the young men of Aven and of Pibeseth shall fall by the sword
and these cities shall go into captivity.
at Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened when I shall
break there the yokes of Egypt and the pomp of her strength
shall cease in her as for her a cloud shall cover her and
her daughters shall go into captivity.
thus will I execute judgments in Egypt and they shall know
that I Am the lord.
and it came to pass in the eleventh year in the first month
in the seventh day of the month that the word of the lord
came unto me saying
son of man I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt
and lo it shall not be bound up to be healed to put a
roller to bind it to make it strong to hold the sword.
therefore thus saith the lord God behold I Am against
Pharaoh king of Egypt and will break his arms the strong
and that which was broken and I will cause the sword to fall
out of his hand.
and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and will
disperse them through the countries.
and I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon and put
my sword in his hand but I will break Pharaoh s arms and he
shall groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded
man.
but I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon and the
arms of Pharaoh shall fall down and they shall know that I Am
the lord when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king
of Babylon and he shall stretch it out upon the land of
Egypt.
and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and
disperse them among the countries and they shall know that I
Am the lord.
and it came to pass in the eleventh year in the third month
in the first day of the month that the word of the lord came
unto me saying
son of man speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt and to his
multitude whom art thou like in thy greatness?
behold the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair
branches and with a shadowing shroud and of an high stature
and his top was among the thick boughs.
the waters made him great the deep set him up on high with
her rivers running round about his plants and sent her little
rivers unto all the trees of the field.
therefore his height was exalted above all the trees of the
field and his boughs were multiplied and his branches became
long because of the multitude of waters when he shot forth.
all the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs and
under his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth
their young and under his shadow dwelt all great nations.
thus was he fair in his greatness in the length of his
branches for his root was by great waters.
the cedars in the garden of God could not hide him the fir
trees were not like his boughs and the chestnut trees were
not like his branches nor any tree in the garden of God was
like unto him in his beauty.
I have made him fair by the multitude of his branches so that
all the trees of Eden that were in the garden of God envied
him.
therefore thus saith the lord God because thou hast lifted up
thyself in height and he hath shot up his top among the thick
boughs and his heart is lifted up in his height
I have therefore delivered him into the hand of the Mighty one
of the heathen he shall surely deal with him I have driven
him out for his wickedness.
and strangers the terrible of the nations have cut him off
and have left him upon the mountains and in all the valleys
his branches are fallen and his boughs are broken by all the
rivers of the land and all the people of the earth are gone
down from his shadow and have left him.
upon his ruin shall all the fowls of the heaven remain and
all the beasts of the field shall be upon his branches
to the end that none of all the trees by the waters exalt
themselves for their height Neither shoot up their top among
the thick boughs Neither their trees stand up in their
height all that drink water for they are all delivered unto
death to the nether parts of the earth in the midst of the
children of men with them that go down to the pit.
thus saith the lord God in the day when he went down to the
grave I caused a mourning I covered the deep for him and I
restrained the floods thereof and the great waters were
stayed and I caused Lebanon to mourn for him and all the
trees of the field fainted for him.
I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall when I
cast him down to hell with them that descend into the pit and
all the trees of Eden the choice and best of Lebanon all
that drink water shall be comforted in the nether parts of
the earth.
they also went down into hell with him unto them that be slain
with the sword and they that were his arm that dwelt under
his shadow in the midst of the heathen.
to whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the
trees of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees
of Eden unto the nether parts of the earth thou shalt lie in
the midst of the uncircumcised with them that be slain by the
sword. this is Pharaoh and all his multitude saith the lord
God.
and it came to pass in the twelfth year in the twelfth month
in the first day of the month that the word of the lord came
unto me saying
son of man take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt
and say unto him thou art like a young lion of the nations
and thou art as a whale in the seas and thou camest forth
with thy rivers and troubledst the waters with thy feet and
fouledst their rivers.
thus saith the lord God I will therefore spread out my net
over thee with a company of many people and they shall bring
thee up in my net.
then will I leave thee upon the land I will cast thee forth
upon the open field and will cause all the fowls of the
heaven to remain upon thee and I will fill the beasts of the
whole earth with thee.
and I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains and fill the
valleys with thy height.
I will also water with thy blood the land wherein thou
swimmest even to the mountains and the rivers shall be full
of thee.
and when I shall put thee out I will cover the heaven and
make the stars thereof dark I will cover the sun with a
cloud and the moon shall not give her light.
all the bright lights of heaven will I make dark over thee
and set darkness upon thy land saith the lord God.
I will also vex the hearts of many people when I shall bring
thy destruction among the nations into the countries which
thou hast not known.
yea I will make many people amazed at thee and their kings
shall be horribly afraid for thee when I shall brandish my
sword before them and they shall tremble at every moment
every man for his own life in the day of thy fall.
for thus saith the lord God the sword of the king of Babylon
shall come upon thee.
by the swords of the Mighty will I cause thy multitude to
fall the terrible of the nations all of them and they shall
spoil the pomp of Egypt and all the multitude thereof shall
be destroyed.
I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside the
great waters Neither shall the foot of man trouble them any
more nor the hoofs of beasts trouble them.
then will I make their waters deep and cause their rivers to
run like oil saith the lord God.
when I shall make the land of Egypt desolate and the country
shall be destitute of that whereof it was full when I shall
smite all them that dwell therein then shall they know that I
Am the lord.
this is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her the
daughters of the nations shall lament her they shall lament
for her even for Egypt and for all her multitude saith the
lord God.
it came to pass also in the twelfth year in the fifteenth day
of the month that the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man wail for the multitude of Egypt and cast them
down even her and the daughters of the famous nations unto
the nether parts of the earth with them that go down into the
pit.
whom dost thou pass in beauty? go down and be thou laid with
the uncircumcised.
they shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the
sword she is delivered to the sword draw her and all her
multitudes.
the strong among the Mighty shall speak to him out of the
midst of hell with them that help him they are gone down
they lie uncircumcised slain by the sword.
Asshur is there and all her company his graves are about him
all of them slain fallen by the sword
whose graves are set in the sides of the pit and her company
is round about her grave all of them slain fallen by the
sword which caused terror in the land of the living.
there is Elam and all her multitude round about her grave all
of them slain fallen by the sword which are gone down
uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth which caused
their terror in the land of the living yet have they borne
their shame with them that go down to the pit.
they have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her
multitude her graves are round about him all of them
uncircumcised slain by the sword though their terror was
caused in the land of the living yet have they borne their
shame with them that go down to the pit he is put in the
midst of them that be slain.
there is Meshech Tubal and all her multitude her graves are
round about him all of them uncircumcised slain by the
sword though they caused their terror in the land of the
living.
and they shall not lie with the Mighty that are fallen of the
uncircumcised which are gone down to hell with their weapons
of war and they have laid their swords under their heads but
their iniquities shall be upon their bones though they were
the terror of the Mighty in the land of the living.
yea thou shalt be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised
and shalt lie with them that are slain with the sword.
there is Edom her kings and all her princes which with
their might are laid by them that were slain by the sword
they shall lie with the uncircumcised and with them that go
down to the pit.
there be the princes of the north all of them and all the
Zidonians which are gone down with the slain with their
terror they are ashamed of their might and they lie
uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword and bear
their shame with them that go down to the pit.
Pharaoh shall see them and shall be comforted over all his
multitude even Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword
saith the lord God.
for I have caused my terror in the land of the living and he
shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that
are slain with the sword even Pharaoh and all his multitude
saith the lord God.
again the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man speak to the children of thy people and say unto
them when I bring the sword upon a land if the people of the
land take a man of their coasts and set him for their
watchman
if when he seeth the sword come upon the land he blow the
trumpet and warn the people
then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet and taketh
not warning if the sword come and take him away his blood
shall be upon his own head.
he heard the sound of the trumpet and took not warning his
blood shall be upon him. but he that taketh warning shall
deliver his soul.
but if the watchman see the sword come and blow not the
trumpet and the people be not warned if the sword come and
take any person from among them he is taken away in his
iniquity but his blood will I require at the watchman s hand.
so thou O son of man I have set thee a watchman unto the
house of Israel therefore thou shalt hear the word at my
mouth and warn them from me.
when I say unto the wicked O wicked man thou shalt surely
die if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way
that wicked man shall die in his iniquity but his blood will
I require at thine hand.
nevertheless if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from
it if he do not turn from his way he shall die in his
iniquity but thou hast delivered thy soul.
therefore O thou son of man speak unto the house of Israel
thus ye speak saying if our transgressions and our sins be
upon us and we pine away in them how should we then live?
say unto them as I live saith the lord God I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked but that the wicked turn
from his way and live turn ye turn ye from your evil ways
for why will ye die O house of Israel?
therefore thou son of man say unto the children of thy
people the righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver
him in the day of his transgression as for the wickedness of
the wicked he shall not fall thereby in the day that he
turneth from his wickedness Neither shall the righteous be
able to live for his righteousness in the day that he sinneth.
when I shall say to the righteous that he shall surely live
if he trust to his own righteousness and commit iniquity all
his righteousnesses shall not be remembered but for his
iniquity that he hath committed he shall die for it.
again when I say unto the wicked thou shalt surely die if
he turn from his Sin and do that which is lawful and right
if the wicked restore the pledge give again that he had
robbed walk in the statutes of life without committing
iniquity he shall surely live he shall not die.
none of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned
unto him he hath done that which is lawful and right he
shall surely live.
yet the children of thy people say the way of the lord is not
equal but as for them their way is not equal.
when the righteous turneth from his righteousness and
committeth iniquity he shall even die thereby.
but if the wicked turn from his wickedness and do that which
is lawful and right he shall live thereby.
yet ye say the way of the lord is not equal. O ye house of
Israel I will judge you every one after his ways.
and it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity in
the tenth month in the fifth day of the month that one that
had escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me saying the city is
smitten.
now the hand of the lord was upon me in the evening afore he
that was escaped came and had opened my mouth until he came
to me in the morning and my mouth was opened and I was no
more dumb.
then the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man they that inhabit those wastes of the land of
Israel speak saying Abraham was one and he inherited the
land but we are many the land is given us for inheritance.
wherefore say unto them thus saith the lord God ye eat with
the blood and lift up your eyes toward your idols and shed
blood and shall ye possess the land?
ye stand upon your sword ye work abomination and ye defile
every one his neighbour s wife and shall ye possess the land?
say thou thus unto them thus saith the lord God as I live
surely they that are in the wastes shall fall by the sword
and him that is in the open field will I give to the beasts to
be devoured and they that be in the forts and in the caves
shall die of the pestilence.
for I will lay the land most desolate and the pomp of her
strength shall cease and the mountains of Israel shall be
desolate that none shall pass through.
then shall they know that I Am the lord when I have laid the
land most desolate because of all their abominations which
they have committed.
also thou son of man the children of thy people still are
talking against thee by the walls and in the doors of the
houses and speak one to another every one to his brother
saying come I pray you and hear what is the word that
cometh forth from the lord.
and they come unto thee as the people cometh and they sit
before thee as my people and they hear thy words but they
will not do them for with their mouth they shew Much love
but their heart goeth after their covetousness.
and lo thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that
hath a pleasant voice and can play well on an instrument for
they hear thy words but they do them not.
and when this cometh to pass lo it will come then shall
they know that a prophet hath been among them.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man prophesy against the shepherds of Israel
prophesy and say unto them thus saith the lord God unto the
shepherds woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed
themselves should not the shepherds feed the flocks?
ye eat the fat and ye clothe you with the wool ye kill them
that are fed but ye feed not the flock.
the diseased have ye not strengthened Neither have ye healed
that which was sick Neither have ye bound up that which was
broken Neither have ye brought again that which was driven
away Neither have ye sought that which was lost but with
force and with cruelty have ye ruled them.
and they were scattered because there is no Shepherd and
they became meat to all the beasts of the field when they
were scattered.
my sheep wandered through all the mountains and upon every
high hill yea my flock was scattered upon all the face of
the earth and none did search or seek after them.
therefore ye shepherds hear the word of the lord
as I live saith the lord God surely because my flock became
a prey and my flock became meat to every beast of the field
because there was no Shepherd Neither did my shepherds search
for my flock but the shepherds fed themselves and fed not my
flock
therefore O ye shepherds hear the word of the lord
thus saith the lord God behold I Am against the shepherds
and I will require my flock at their hand and cause them to
cease from feeding the flock Neither shall the shepherds feed
themselves any more for I will deliver my flock from their
mouth that they may not be meat for them.
for thus saith the lord God behold I even I will both
search my sheep and seek them out.
as a Shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is
among his sheep that are scattered so will I seek out my
sheep and will deliver them out of all places where they have
been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.
and I will bring them out from the people and gather them
from the countries and will bring them to their own land and
feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers and in
all the inhabited places of the country.
I will feed them in a good pasture and upon the high
mountains of Israel shall their fold be there shall they lie
in a good fold and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the
mountains of Israel.
I will feed my flock and I will cause them to lie down saith
the lord God.
I will seek that which was lost and bring again that which
was driven away and will bind up that which was broken and
will strengthen that which was sick but I will destroy the
fat and the strong I will feed them with judgment.
and as for you O my flock thus saith the lord God behold I
judge between cattle and cattle between the rams and the he
goats.
seemeth it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good
pasture but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of
your pastures? and to have drunk of the deep waters but ye
must foul the residue with your feet?
and as for my flock they eat that which ye have trodden with
your feet and they drink that which ye have fouled with your
feet.
therefore thus saith the lord God unto them behold I even
I will judge between the fat cattle and between the lean
cattle.
because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder and pushed
all the diseased with your horns till ye have scattered them
abroad
therefore will I save my flock and they shall no more be a
prey and I will judge between cattle and cattle.
and I will set up one Shepherd over them and he shall feed
them even my servant David he shall feed them and he shall
be their Shepherd.
and I the lord will be their God and my servant David a
prince among them I the lord have spoken it.
and I will make with them a covenant of peace and will cause
the evil beasts to cease out of the land and they shall dwell
safely in the wilderness and sleep in the woods.
and I will make them and the places round about my hill a
blessing and I will cause the shower to come down in his
season there shall be showers of blessing.
and the tree of the field shall yield her fruit and the earth
shall yield her increase and they shall be safe in their
land and shall know that I Am the lord when I have broken
the Bands of their yoke and delivered them out of the hand of
those that served themselves of them.
and they shall no more be a prey to the heathen Neither shall
the beast of the land devour them but they shall dwell
safely and none shall make them afraid.
and I will raise up for them a plant of renown and they shall
be no more consumed with hunger in the land Neither bear the
shame of the heathen any more.
thus shall they know that I the lord their God Am with them
and that they even the house of Israel are my people saith
the lord God.
and ye my flock the flock of my pasture are men and I Am
your God saith the lord God.
moreover the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man set thy face against mount Seir and prophesy
against it
and say unto it thus saith the lord God behold O mount
Seir I Am against thee and I will stretch out mine hand
against thee and I will make thee most desolate.
I will lay thy cities waste and thou shalt be desolate and
thou shalt know that I Am the lord.
because thou hast had a perpetual hatred and hast shed the
blood of the children of Israel by the force of the sword in
the time of their calamity in the time that their iniquity
had an end
therefore as I live saith the lord God I will prepare thee
unto blood and blood shall pursue thee sith thou hast not
hated blood even blood shall pursue thee.
thus will I make mount Seir most desolate and cut off from it
him that passeth out and him that returneth.
and I will fill his mountains with his slain men in thy
hills and in thy valleys and in all thy rivers shall they
fall that are slain with the sword.
I will make thee perpetual desolations and thy cities shall
not return and ye shall know that I Am the lord.
because thou hast said these two nations and these two
countries shall be mine and we will possess it whereas the
lord was there
therefore as I live saith the lord God I will even do
according to thine anger and according to thine envy which
thou hast used out of thy hatred against them and I will make
myself known among them when I have judged thee.
and thou shalt know that I Am the lord and that I have heard
all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the
mountains of Israel saying they are laid desolate they are
given us to consume.
thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me and have
multiplied your words against me I have heard them.
thus saith the lord God when the whole earth rejoiceth I
will make thee desolate.
as thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of
Israel because it was desolate so will I do unto thee thou
shalt be desolate O mount Seir and all Idumea even all of
it and they shall know that I Am the lord.
also thou son of man prophesy unto the mountains of Israel
and say ye mountains of Israel hear the word of the lord
thus saith the lord God because the enemy hath said against
you aha even the ancient high places are ours in possession
therefore prophesy and say thus saith the lord God because
they have made you desolate and swallowed you up on every
side that ye might be a possession unto the residue of the
heathen and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers and are
an infamy of the people
therefore ye mountains of Israel hear the word of the lord
God thus saith the lord God to the mountains and to the
hills to the rivers and to the valleys to the desolate
wastes and to the cities that are forsaken which became a
prey and derision to the residue of the heathen that are round
about
therefore thus saith the lord God surely in the fire of my
jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the heathen and
against all Idumea which have appointed my land into their
possession with the joy of all their heart with despiteful
minds to cast it out for a prey.
prophesy therefore concerning the land of Israel and say unto
the mountains and to the hills to the rivers and to the
valleys thus saith the lord God behold I have spoken in my
jealousy and in my fury because ye have borne the shame of
the heathen
therefore thus saith the lord God I have lifted up mine hand
surely the heathen that are about you they shall bear their
shame.
but ye O mountains of Israel ye shall shoot forth your
branches and yield your fruit to my people of Israel for
they are at hand to come.
for behold I Am for you and I will turn unto you and ye
shall be tilled and sown
and I will multiply men upon you all the house of Israel
even all of it and the cities shall be inhabited and the
wastes shall be builded
and I will multiply upon you man and beast and they shall
increase and bring fruit and I will settle you after your old
estates and will do better unto you than at your beginnings
and ye shall know that I Am the lord.
yea I will cause men to walk upon you even my people Israel
and they shall possess thee and thou shalt be their
inheritance and thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of
men.
thus saith the lord God because they say unto you thou land
devourest up men and hast bereaved thy nations
therefore thou shalt devour men no more Neither bereave thy
nations any more saith the lord God.
Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the shame of the
heathen any more Neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the
people any more Neither shalt thou cause thy nations to fall
any more saith the lord God.
moreover the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land
they defiled it by their own way and by their doings their
way was before me as the uncleanness of a removed woman.
wherefore I poured my fury upon them for the blood that they
had shed upon the land and for their idols wherewith they had
polluted it
and I scattered them among the heathen and they were
dispersed through the countries according to their way and
according to their doings I judged them.
and when they entered unto the heathen whither they went
they profaned my holy name when they said to them these are
the people of the lord and are gone forth out of his land.
but I had pity for mine holy name which the house of Israel
had profaned among the heathen whither they went.
therefore say unto the house of Israel thus saith the lord
God I do not this for your sakes O house of Israel but for
mine holy name s sake which ye have profaned among the
heathen whither ye went.
and I will sanctify my great name which was profaned among
the heathen which ye have profaned in the midst of them and
the heathen shall know that I Am the lord saith the lord God
when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.
for I will take you from among the heathen and gather you out
of all countries and will bring you into your own land.
then will I sprinkle clean water upon you and ye shall be
clean from all your filthiness and from all your idols will
I cleanse you.
a new heart also will I give you and a new spirit will I put
within you and I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh and I will give you an heart of flesh.
and I will put my spirit within you and cause you to walk in
my statutes and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.
and ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers
and ye shall be my people and I will be your God.
I will also save you from all your uncleannesses and I will
call for the corn and will increase it and lay no famine
upon you.
and I will multiply the fruit of the tree and the increase of
the field that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine
among the heathen.
then shall ye remember your own evil ways and your doings
that were not good and shall lothe yourselves in your own
sight for your iniquities and for your abominations.
not for your sakes do I this saith the lord God be it known
unto you be ashamed and confounded for your own ways O house
of Israel.
thus saith the lord God in the day that I shall have cleansed
you from all your iniquities I will also cause you to dwell in
the cities and the wastes shall be builded.
and the desolate land shall be tilled whereas it lay desolate
in the sight of all that passed by.
and they shall say this land that was desolate is become like
the garden of Eden and the waste and desolate and ruined
cities are become fenced and are inhabited.
then the heathen that are left round about you shall know that
I the lord build the ruined places and plant that that was
desolate I the lord have spoken it and I will do it.
thus saith the lord God I will yet for this be enquired of by
the house of Israel to do it for them I will increase them
with men like a flock.
as the holy flock as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn
feasts so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of
men and they shall know that I Am the lord.
the hand of the lord was upon me and carried me out in the
spirit of the lord and set me down in the midst of the valley
which was full of bones
and caused me to pass by them round about and behold there
were very many in the open valley and lo they were very
dry.
and he said unto me son of man can these bones live? and I
answered O lord God thou knowest.
again he said unto me prophesy upon these bones and say unto
them O ye dry bones hear the word of the lord.
thus saith the lord God unto these bones behold I will cause
breath to enter into you and ye shall live
and I will lay sinews upon you and will bring up flesh upon
you and cover you with skin and put breath in you and ye
shall live and ye shall know that I Am the lord.
so I prophesied as I was commanded and as I prophesied there
was a noise and behold a shaking and the bones came
together bone to his bone.
and when I beheld lo the sinews and the flesh came up upon
them and the skin covered them above but there was no breath
in them.
then said he unto me prophesy unto the wind prophesy son of
man and say to the wind thus saith the lord God come from
the four winds O breath and breathe upon these slain that
they may live.
so I prophesied as he commanded me and the breath came into
them and they lived and stood up upon their feet an
exceeding great army.
then he said unto me son of man these bones are the whole
house of Israel behold they say our bones are dried and
our hope is lost we are cut off for our parts.
therefore prophesy and say unto them thus saith the lord God
behold O my people I will open your graves and cause you to
come up out of your graves and bring you into the land of
Israel.
and ye shall know that I Am the lord when I have opened your
graves O my people and brought you up out of your graves
and shall put my spirit in you and ye shall live and I shall
place you in your own land then shall ye know that I the lord
have spoken it and performed it saith the lord.
the word of the lord came again unto me saying
moreover thou son of man take thee one stick and write upon
it for Judah and for the children of Israel his companions
then take another stick and write upon it for Joseph the
stick of Ephraim and for all the house of Israel his
companions
and join them one to another into one stick and they shall
become one in thine hand.
and when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee
saying wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?
say unto them thus saith the lord God behold I will take
the stick of Joseph which is in the hand of Ephraim and the
tribes of Israel his fellows and will put them with him even
with the stick of Judah and make them one stick and they
shall be one in mine hand.
and the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand
before their eyes.
and say unto them thus saith the lord God behold I will
take the children of Israel from among the heathen whither
they be gone and will gather them on every side and bring
them into their own land
and I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains
of Israel and one king shall be king to them all and they
shall be no more two nations Neither shall they be divided
into two kingdoms any more at all.
Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their
idols nor with their detestable things nor with any of their
transgressions but I will save them out of all their
dwellingplaces wherein they have sinned and will cleanse
them so shall they be my people and I will be their God.
and David my servant shall be king over them and they all
shall have one Shepherd they shall also walk in my judgments
and observe my statutes and do them.
and they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob
my servant wherein your fathers have dwelt and they shall
dwell therein even they and their children and their
children s children for ever and my servant David shall be
their prince for ever.
moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them it shall
be an everlasting covenant with them and I will place them
and multiply them and will set my sanctuary in the midst of
them for evermore.
my tabernacle also shall be with them yea I will be their
God and they shall be my people.
and the heathen shall know that I the lord do sanctify Israel
when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
son of man set thy face against Gog the land of Magog the
chief prince of Meshech and Tubal and prophesy against him
and say thus saith the lord God behold I Am against thee O
Gog the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal
and I will turn thee back and put hooks into thy jaws and I
will bring thee forth and all thine army horses and
horsemen all of them clothed with all sorts of armour even a
great company with bucklers and shields all of them handling
swords
Persia Ethiopia and Libya with them all of them with shield
and helmet
Gomer and all his Bands the house of Togarmah of the north
quarters and all his Bands and many people with thee.
be thou prepared and prepare for thyself thou and all thy
company that are assembled unto thee and be thou a guard unto
them.
after many days thou shalt be visited in the latter years
thou shalt come into the land that is brought back from the
sword and is gathered out of many people against the
mountains of Israel which have been always waste but it is
brought forth out of the nations and they shall dwell safely
all of them.
thou shalt ascend and come like a storm thou shalt be like a
cloud to cover the land thou and all thy Bands and many
people with thee.
thus saith the lord God it shall also come to pass that at
the same time shall things come into thy mind and thou shalt
think an evil thought
and thou shalt say I will go up to the land of unwalled
villages I will go to them that are at rest that dwell
safely all of them dwelling without walls and having Neither
bars nor gates
to take a spoil and to take a prey to turn thine hand upon
the desolate places that are now inhabited and upon the
people that are gathered out of the nations which have gotten
cattle and goods that dwell in the midst of the land.
Sheba and Dedan and the merchants of Tarshish with all the
young lions thereof shall say unto thee art thou come to
take a spoil? hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey?
to carry away Silver and gold to take away cattle and goods
to take a great spoil?
therefore son of man prophesy and say unto Gog thus saith
the lord God in that day when my people of Israel dwelleth
safely shalt thou not know it?
and thou shalt come from thy place out of the north parts
thou and many people with thee all of them riding upon
horses a great company and a Mighty army
and thou shalt come up against my people of Israel as a cloud
to cover the land it shall be in the latter days and I will
bring thee against my land that the heathen may know me when
I shall be sanctified in thee O Gog before their eyes.
thus saith the lord God art thou he of whom I have spoken in
old time by my servants the prophets of Israel which
prophesied in those days many years that I would bring thee
against them?
and it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come
against the land of Israel saith the lord God that my fury
shall come up in my face.
for in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken
surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land
of Israel
so that the fishes of the sea and the fowls of the heaven
and the beasts of the field and all creeping things that
creep upon the earth and all the men that are upon the face
of the earth shall shake at my presence and the mountains
shall be thrown down and the steep places shall fall and
every wall shall fall to the ground.
and I will call for a sword against him throughout all my
mountains saith the lord God every man s sword shall be
against his brother.
and I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood
and I will rain upon him and upon his Bands and upon the
many people that are with him an overflowing rain and great
hailstones fire and brimstone.
thus will I magnify myself and sanctify myself and I will be
known in the eyes of many nations and they shall know that I
Am the lord.
therefore thou son of man prophesy against Gog and say
thus saith the lord God behold I Am against thee O Gog the
chief prince of Meshech and Tubal
and I will turn thee back and leave but the sixth part of
thee and will cause thee to come up from the north parts and
will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel
and I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand and will cause
thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand.
thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel thou and all
thy Bands and the people that is with thee I will give thee
unto the ravenous birds of every sort and to the beasts of
the field to be devoured.
thou shalt fall upon the open field for I have spoken it
saith the lord God.
and I will send a fire on Magog and among them that dwell
carelessly in the isles and they shall know that I Am the
lord.
so will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people
Israel and I will not let them pollute my holy name any more
and the heathen shall know that I Am the lord the holy one in
Israel.
behold it is come and it is done saith the lord God this
is the day whereof I have spoken.
and they that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth
and shall set on fire and burn the weapons both the shields
and the bucklers the bows and the arrows and the handstaves
and the spears and they shall burn them with fire seven
years
so that they shall take no wood out of the field Neither cut
down any out of the forests for they shall burn the weapons
with fire and they shall spoil those that spoiled them and
rob those that robbed them saith the lord God.
and it shall come to pass in that day that I will give unto
Gog a place there of graves in Israel the valley of the
passengers on the east of the sea and it shall stop the noses
of the passengers and there shall they bury Gog and all his
multitude and they shall call it the valley of Hamongog.
and seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them
that they may cleanse the land.
yea all the people of the land shall bury them and it shall
be to them a renown the day that I shall be glorified saith
the lord God.
and they shall sever out men of continual employment passing
through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain
upon the face of the earth to cleanse it after the end of
seven months shall they search.
and the passengers that pass through the land when any seeth
a man s bone then shall he set up a sign by it till the
buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamongog.
and also the name of the city shall be Hamonah. thus shall
they cleanse the land.
and thou son of man thus saith the lord God speak unto
every feathered fowl and to every beast of the field
assemble yourselves and come gather yourselves on every side
to my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you even a great
sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel that ye may eat flesh
and drink blood.
ye shall eat the flesh of the Mighty and drink the blood of
the princes of the earth of rams of lambs and of goats of
bullocks all of them fatlings of Bashan.
and ye shall eat fat till ye be full and drink blood till ye
be drunken of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.
thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots
with Mighty men and with all men of war saith the lord God.
and I will set my glory among the heathen and all the heathen
shall see my judgment that I have executed and my hand that I
have laid upon them.
so the house of Israel shall know that I Am the lord their God
from that day and forward.
and the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into
captivity for their iniquity because they trespassed against
me therefore hid I my face from them and gave them into the
hand of their enemies so fell they all by the sword.
according to their uncleanness and according to their
transgressions have I done unto them and hid my face from
them.
therefore thus saith the lord God now will I bring again the
captivity of Jacob and have mercy upon the whole house of
Israel and will be jealous for my holy name
after that they have borne their shame and all their
trespasses whereby they have trespassed against me when they
dwelt safely in their land and none made them afraid.
when I have brought them again from the people and gathered
them out of their enemies lands and Am sanctified in them in
the sight of many nations
then shall they know that I Am the lord their God which
caused them to be led into captivity among the heathen but I
have gathered them unto their own land and have left none of
them any more there.
Neither will I hide my face any more from them for I have
poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel saith the lord
God.
in the five and twentieth year of our captivity in the
beginning of the year in the tenth day of the month in the
fourteenth year after that the city was smitten in the
selfsame day the hand of the lord was upon me and brought me
thither.
in the visions of God brought he me into the land of Israel
and set me upon a very high mountain by which was as the
frame of a city on the south.
and he brought me thither and behold there was a man whose
appearance was like the appearance of brass with a line of
flax in his hand and a measuring reed and he stood in the
gate.
and the man said unto me son of man behold with thine eyes
and hear with thine ears and set thine heart upon all that I
shall shew thee for to the intent that I might shew them unto
thee art thou brought hither declare all that thou seest to
the house of Israel.
and behold a wall on the outside of the house round about and
in the man s hand a measuring reed of six cubits long by the
cubit and an hand breadth so he measured the breadth of the
building one reed and the height one reed.
then came he unto the gate which looketh toward the east and
went up the stairs thereof and measured the threshold of the
gate which was one reed broad and the other threshold of the
gate which was one reed broad.
and every little chamber was one reed long and one reed
broad and between the little chambers were five cubits and
the threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate within was
one reed.
he measured also the porch of the gate within one reed.
then measured he the porch of the gate eight cubits and the
posts thereof two cubits and the porch of the gate was
inward.
and the little chambers of the gate eastward were three on
this side and three on that side they three were of one
measure and the posts had one measure on this side and on
that side.
and he measured the breadth of the entry of the gate Ten
cubits and the length of the gate thirteen cubits.
the space also before the little chambers was one cubit on
this side and the space was one cubit on that side and the
little chambers were six cubits on this side and six cubits
on that side.
he measured then the gate from the roof of one little chamber
to the roof of another the breadth was five and twenty
cubits door against door.
he made also posts of threescore cubits even unto the post of
the court round about the gate.
and from the face of the gate of the entrance unto the face of
the porch of the inner gate were fifty cubits.
and there were narrow windows to the little chambers and to
their posts within the gate round about and likewise to the
arches and windows were round about inward and upon each
post were palm trees.
then brought he me into the outward court and lo there were
chambers and a pavement made for the court round about
thirty chambers were upon the pavement.
and the pavement by the side of the gates over against the
length of the gates was the lower pavement.
then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower
gate unto the forefront of the inner court without an hundred
cubits eastward and northward.
and the gate of the outward court that looked toward the
north he measured the length thereof and the breadth
thereof.
and the little chambers thereof were three on this side and
three on that side and the posts thereof and the arches
thereof were after the measure of the first gate the length
thereof was fifty cubits and the breadth five and twenty
cubits.
and their windows and their arches and their palm trees
were after the measure of the gate that looketh toward the
east and they went up unto it by seven steps and the arches
thereof were before them.
and the gate of the inner court was over against the gate
toward the north and toward the east and he measured from
gate to gate an hundred cubits.
after that he brought me toward the south and behold a gate
toward the south and he measured the posts thereof and the
arches thereof according to these measures.
and there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round
about like those windows the length was fifty cubits and
the breadth five and twenty cubits.
and there were seven steps to go up to it and the arches
thereof were before them and it had palm trees one on this
side and another on that side upon the posts thereof.
and there was a gate in the inner court toward the south and
he measured from gate to gate toward the south an hundred
cubits.
and he brought me to the inner court by the south gate and he
measured the south gate according to these measures
and the little chambers thereof and the posts thereof and
the arches thereof according to these measures and there
were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about it
was fifty cubits long and five and twenty cubits broad.
and the arches round about were five and twenty cubits long
and five cubits broad.
and the arches thereof were toward the utter court and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof and the going up to it had
eight steps.
and he brought me into the inner court toward the east and he
measured the gate according to these measures.
and the little chambers thereof and the posts thereof and
the arches thereof were according to these measures and
there were windows therein and in the arches thereof round
about it was fifty cubits long and five and twenty cubits
broad.
and the arches thereof were toward the outward court and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof on this side and on that
side and the going up to it had eight steps.
and he brought me to the north gate and measured it according
to these measures
the little chambers thereof the posts thereof and the arches
thereof and the windows to it round about the length was
fifty cubits and the breadth five and twenty cubits.
and the posts thereof were toward the utter court and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof on this side and on that
side and the going up to it had eight steps.
and the chambers and the entries thereof were by the posts of
the gates where they washed the burnt offering.
and in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side and
two tables on that side to slay thereon the burnt offering
and the Sin offering and the trespass offering.
and at the side without as one goeth up to the entry of the
north gate were two tables and on the other side which was
at the porch of the gate were two tables.
four tables were on this side and four tables on that side
by the side of the gate eight tables whereupon they slew
their sacrifices.
and the four tables were of hewn stone for the burnt offering
of a cubit and an half long and a cubit and an half broad
and one cubit high whereupon also they laid the instruments
wherewith they slew the burnt offering and the sacrifice.
and within were hooks an hand broad fastened round about
and upon the tables was the flesh of the offering.
and without the inner gate were the chambers of the singers in
the inner court which was at the side of the north gate and
their prospect was toward the south one at the side of the
east gate having the prospect toward the north.
and he said unto me this chamber whose prospect is toward
the south is for the priests the keepers of the charge of
the house.
and the chamber whose prospect is toward the north is for the
priests the keepers of the charge of the altar these are the
sons of Zadok among the sons of Levi which come near to the
lord to minister unto him.
so he measured the court an hundred cubits long and an
hundred cubits broad foursquare and the altar that was
before the house.
and he brought me to the porch of the house and measured each
post of the porch five cubits on this side and five cubits
on that side and the breadth of the gate was three cubits on
this side and three cubits on that side.
the length of the porch was twenty cubits and the breadth
eleven cubits and he brought me by the steps whereby they
went up to it and there were pillars by the posts one on
this side and another on that side.
afterward he brought me to the temple and measured the posts
six cubits broad on the one side and six cubits broad on the
other side which was the breadth of the tabernacle.
and the breadth of the door was Ten cubits and the sides of
the door were five cubits on the one side and five cubits on
the other side and he measured the length thereof forty
cubits and the breadth twenty cubits.
then went he inward and measured the post of the door two
cubits and the door six cubits and the breadth of the door
seven cubits.
so he measured the length thereof twenty cubits and the
breadth twenty cubits before the temple and he said unto
me this is the most holy place.
after he measured the wall of the house six cubits and the
breadth of every side chamber four cubits round about the
house on every side.
and the side chambers were three one over another and thirty
in order and they entered into the wall which was of the
house for the side chambers round about that they might have
hold but they had not hold in the wall of the house.
and there was an enlarging and a winding about still upward
to the side chambers for the winding about of the house went
still upward round about the house therefore the breadth of
the house was still upward and so increased from the lowest
chamber to the highest by the midst.
I saw also the height of the house round about the
foundations of the side chambers were a full reed of six great
cubits.
the thickness of the wall which was for the side chamber
without was five cubits and that which was left was the
place of the side chambers that were within.
and between the chambers was the wideness of twenty cubits
round about the house on every side.
and the doors of the side chambers were toward the place that
was left one door toward the north and another door toward
the south and the breadth of the place that was left was five
cubits round about.
now the building that was before the separate place at the end
toward the west was seventy cubits broad and the wall of the
building was five cubits thick round about and the length
thereof ninety cubits.
so he measured the house an hundred cubits long and the
separate place and the building with the walls thereof an
hundred cubits long
also the breadth of the face of the house and of the separate
place toward the east an hundred cubits.
and he measured the length of the building over against the
separate place which was behind it and the galleries thereof
on the one side and on the other side an hundred cubits with
the inner temple and the porches of the court
the door posts and the narrow windows and the galleries
round about on their three stories over against the door
cieled with wood round about and from the ground up to the
windows and the windows were covered
to that above the door even unto the inner house and
without and by all the wall round about within and without
by measure.
and it was made with Cherubims and palm trees so that a palm
tree was between a Cherub and a Cherub and every Cherub had
two faces
so that the face of a man was toward the palm tree on the one
side and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the
other side it was made through all the house round about.
from the ground unto above the door were Cherubims and palm
trees made and on the wall of the temple.
the posts of the temple were squared and the face of the
sanctuary the appearance of the one as the appearance of the
other.
the altar of wood was three cubits high and the length
thereof two cubits and the corners thereof and the length
thereof and the walls thereof were of wood and he said unto
me this is the table that is before the lord.
and the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.
and the doors had two leaves apiece two turning leaves two
leaves for the one door and two leaves for the other door.
and there were made on them on the doors of the temple
Cherubims and palm trees like as were made upon the walls
and there were thick planks upon the face of the porch
without.
and there were narrow windows and palm trees on the one side
and on the other side on the sides of the porch and upon the
side chambers of the house and thick planks.
then he brought me forth into the utter court the way toward
the north and he brought me into the chamber that was over
against the separate place and which was before the building
toward the north.
before the length of an hundred cubits was the north door and
the breadth was fifty cubits.
over against the twenty cubits which were for the inner court
and over against the pavement which was for the utter court
was gallery against gallery in three stories.
and before the chambers was a walk to Ten cubits breadth
inward a way of one cubit and their doors toward the north.
now the upper chambers were shorter for the galleries were
higher than these than the lower and than the middlemost of
the building.
for they were in three stories but had not pillars as the
pillars of the courts therefore the building was straitened
more than the lowest and the middlemost from the ground.
and the wall that was without over against the chambers
toward the utter court on the forepart of the chambers the
length thereof was fifty cubits.
for the length of the chambers that were in the utter court
was fifty cubits and lo before the temple were an hundred
cubits.
and from under these chambers was the entry on the east side
as one goeth into them from the utter court.
the chambers were in the thickness of the wall of the court
toward the east over against the separate place and over
against the building.
and the way before them was like the appearance of the
chambers which were toward the north as long as they and as
broad as they and all their goings out were both according to
their fashions and according to their doors.
and according to the doors of the chambers that were toward
the south was a door in the head of the way even the way
directly before the wall toward the east as one entereth into
them.
then said he unto me the north chambers and the south
chambers which are before the separate place they be holy
chambers where the priests that approach unto the lord shall
eat the most holy things there shall they lay the most holy
things and the meat offering and the Sin offering and the
trespass offering for the place is holy.
when the priests enter therein then shall they not go out of
the holy place into the utter court but there they shall lay
their garments wherein they minister for they are holy and
shall put on other garments and shall approach to those
things which are for the people.
now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house he
brought me forth toward the gate whose prospect is toward the
east and measured it round about.
he measured the east side with the measuring reed five
hundred reeds with the measuring reed round about.
he measured the north side five hundred reeds with the
measuring reed round about.
he measured the south side five hundred reeds with the
measuring reed.
he turned about to the west side and measured five hundred
reeds with the measuring reed.
he measured it by the four sides it had a wall round about
five hundred reeds long and five hundred broad to make a
separation between the sanctuary and the profane place.
afterward he brought me to the gate even the gate that
looketh toward the east
and behold the glory of the God of Israel came from the way
of the east and his voice was like a noise of many waters
and the earth shined with his glory.
and it was according to the appearance of the vision which I
saw even according to the vision that I saw when I came to
destroy the city and the visions were like the vision that I
saw by the river Chebar and I fell upon my face.
and the glory of the lord came into the house by the way of
the gate whose prospect is toward the east.
so the spirit took me up and brought me into the inner court
and behold the glory of the lord filled the house.
and I heard him speaking unto me out of the house and the man
stood by me.
and he said unto me son of man the place of my throne and
the place of the soles of my feet where I will dwell in the
midst of the children of Israel for ever and my holy name
shall the house of Israel no more defile Neither they nor
their kings by their whoredom nor by the carcases of their
kings in their high places.
in their setting of their threshold by my thresholds and
their post by my posts and the wall between me and them they
have even defiled my holy name by their abominations that they
have committed wherefore I have consumed them in mine anger.
now let them put away their whoredom and the carcases of
their kings far from me and I will dwell in the midst of
them for ever.
thou son of man shew the house to the house of Israel that
they may be ashamed of their iniquities and let them measure
the pattern.
and if they be ashamed of all that they have done shew them
the form of the house and the fashion thereof and the goings
out thereof and the comings in thereof and all the forms
thereof and all the ordinances thereof and all the forms
thereof and all the laws thereof and write it in their
sight that they may keep the whole form thereof and all the
ordinances thereof and do them.
this is the law of the house upon the top of the mountain the
whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy. behold
this is the law of the house.
and these are the measures of the altar after the cubits the
cubit is a cubit and an hand breadth even the bottom shall be
a cubit and the breadth a cubit and the border thereof by
the edge thereof round about shall be a span and this shall
be the higher place of the altar.
and from the bottom upon the ground even to the lower settle
shall be two cubits and the breadth one cubit and from the
lesser settle even to the greater settle shall be four cubits
and the breadth one cubit.
so the altar shall be four cubits and from the altar and
upward shall be four horns.
and the altar shall be twelve cubits long twelve broad
square in the four squares thereof.
and the settle shall be fourteen cubits long and fourteen
broad in the four squares thereof and the border about it
shall be half a cubit and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit
about and his stairs shall look toward the east.
and he said unto me son of man thus saith the lord God
these are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they
shall make it to offer burnt offerings thereon and to
sprinkle blood thereon.
and thou shalt give to the priests the Levites that be of the
seed of Zadok which approach unto me to minister unto me
saith the lord God a young bullock for a Sin offering.
and thou shalt take of the blood thereof and put it on the
four horns of it and on the four corners of the settle and
upon the border round about thus shalt thou cleanse and purge
it.
thou shalt take the bullock also of the Sin offering and he
shall burn it in the appointed place of the house without the
sanctuary.
and on the second day thou shalt offer a kid of the goats
without blemish for a Sin offering and they shall cleanse the
altar as they did cleanse it with the bullock.
when thou hast made an end of cleansing it thou shalt offer a
young bullock without blemish and a Ram out of the flock
without blemish.
and thou shalt offer them before the lord and the priests
shall cast salt upon them and they shall offer them up for a
burnt offering unto the lord.
seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat for a Sin
offering they shall also prepare a young bullock and a Ram
out of the flock without blemish.
seven days shall they purge the altar and purify it and they
shall consecrate themselves.
and when these days are expired it shall be that upon the
eighth day and so forward the priests shall make your burnt
offerings upon the altar and your peace offerings and I will
accept you saith the lord God.
then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward
sanctuary which looketh toward the east and it was shut.
then said the lord unto me this gate shall be shut it shall
not be opened and no man shall enter in by it because the
lord the God of Israel hath entered in by it therefore it
shall be shut.
it is for the prince the prince he shall sit in it to eat
bread before the lord he shall enter by the way of the porch
of that gate and shall go out by the way of the same.
then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house
and I looked and behold the glory of the lord filled the
house of the lord and I fell upon my face.
and the lord said unto me son of man Mark well and behold
with thine eyes and hear with thine ears all that I say unto
thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of the lord
and all the laws thereof and Mark well the entering in of the
house with every going forth of the sanctuary.
and thou shalt say to the rebellious even to the house of
Israel thus saith the lord God O ye house of Israel let it
suffice you of all your abominations
in that ye have brought into my sanctuary strangers
uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh to be in
my sanctuary to pollute it even my house when ye offer my
bread the fat and the blood and they have broken my covenant
because of all your abominations.
and ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things but ye
have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.
thus saith the lord God no stranger uncircumcised in heart
nor uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my sanctuary of
any stranger that is among the children of Israel.
and the Levites that are gone away far from me when Israel
went astray which went astray away from me after their idols
they shall even bear their iniquity.
yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary having charge at
the gates of the house and ministering to the house they
shall slay the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the
people and they shall stand before them to minister unto
them.
because they ministered unto them before their idols and
caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity therefore
have I lifted up mine hand against them saith the lord God
and they shall bear their iniquity.
and they shall not come near unto me to do the office of a
priest unto me nor to come near to any of my holy things in
the most holy place but they shall bear their shame and
their abominations which they have committed.
but I will make them keepers of the charge of the house for
all the service thereof and for all that shall be done
therein.
but the priests the Levites the sons of Zadok that kept the
charge of my sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray
from me they shall come near to me to minister unto me and
they shall stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the
blood saith the lord God
they shall enter into my sanctuary and they shall come near
to my table to minister unto me and they shall keep my
charge.
and it shall come to pass that when they enter in at the
gates of the inner court they shall be clothed with linen
garments and no wool shall come upon them whiles they
minister in the gates of the inner court and within.
they shall have linen bonnets upon their heads and shall have
linen breeches upon their loins they shall not gird
themselves with any thing that causeth sweat.
and when they go forth into the utter court even into the
utter court to the people they shall put off their garments
wherein they ministered and lay them in the holy chambers
and they shall put on other garments and they shall not
sanctify the people with their garments.
Neither shall they shave their heads nor suffer their locks
to grow long they shall only poll their heads.
Neither shall any priest drink wine when they enter into the
inner court.
Neither shall they take for their wives a widow nor her that
is put away but they shall take maidens of the seed of the
house of Israel or a widow that had a priest before.
and they shall teach my people the difference between the holy
and profane and cause them to discern between the unclean and
the clean.
and in controversy they shall stand in judgment and they
shall judge it according to my judgments and they shall keep
my laws and my statutes in all mine assemblies and they shall
hallow my sabbaths.
and they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves
but for father or for mother or for son or for daughter
for brother or for sister that hath had no husband they may
defile themselves.
and after he is cleansed they shall reckon unto him seven
days.
and in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary unto the
inner court to minister in the sanctuary he shall offer his
Sin offering saith the lord God.
and it shall be unto them for an inheritance I Am their
inheritance and ye shall give them no possession in Israel I
Am their possession.
they shall eat the meat offering and the Sin offering and
the trespass offering and every dedicated thing in Israel
shall be theirs.
and the first of all the firstfruits of all things and every
oblation of all of every sort of your oblations shall be the
priest s ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your
dough that he may cause the blessing to rest in thine house.
the priests shall not eat of any thing that is dead of itself
or torn whether it be fowl or beast.
moreover when ye shall divide by Lot the land for
inheritance ye shall offer an oblation unto the lord an holy
portion of the land the length shall be the length of five
and twenty thousand reeds and the breadth shall be Ten
thousand. this shall be holy in all the borders thereof round
about.
of this there shall be for the sanctuary five hundred in
length with five hundred in breadth square round about and
fifty cubits round about for the suburbs thereof.
and of this measure shalt thou measure the length of five and
twenty thousand and the breadth of Ten thousand and in it
shall be the sanctuary and the most holy place.
the holy portion of the land shall be for the priests the
ministers of the sanctuary which shall come near to minister
unto the lord and it shall be a place for their houses and
an holy place for the sanctuary.
and the five and twenty thousand of length and the Ten
thousand of breadth shall also the Levites the ministers of
the house have for themselves for a possession for twenty
chambers.
and ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand
broad and five and twenty thousand long over against the
oblation of the holy portion it shall be for the whole house
of Israel.
and a portion shall be for the prince on the one side and on
the other side of the oblation of the holy portion and of the
possession of the city before the oblation of the holy
portion and before the possession of the city from the west
side westward and from the east side eastward and the length
shall be over against one of the portions from the west
border unto the east border.
in the land shall be his possession in Israel and my princes
shall no more oppress my people and the rest of the land
shall they give to the house of Israel according to their
tribes.
thus saith the lord God let it suffice you O princes of
Israel remove violence and spoil and execute judgment and
justice take away your exactions from my people saith the
lord God.
ye shall have just balances and a just Ephah and a just
bath.
the Ephah and the bath shall be of one measure that the bath
may contain the tenth part of an homer and the Ephah the
tenth part of an homer the measure thereof shall be after the
homer.
and the shekel shall be twenty gerahs twenty shekels five
and twenty shekels fifteen shekels shall be your maneh.
this is the oblation that ye shall offer the sixth part of an
Ephah of an homer of wheat and ye shall give the sixth part
of an Ephah of an homer of barley
concerning the ordinance of oil the bath of oil ye shall
offer the tenth part of a bath out of the cor which is an
homer of Ten baths for Ten baths are an homer
and one lamb out of the flock out of two hundred out of the
fat pastures of Israel for a meat offering and for a burnt
offering and for peace offerings to make reconciliation for
them saith the lord God.
all the people of the land shall give this oblation for the
prince in Israel.
and it shall be the prince s part to give burnt offerings and
meat offerings and drink offerings in the feasts and in the
new moons and in the sabbaths in all solemnities of the
house of Israel he shall prepare the Sin offering and the
meat offering and the burnt offering and the peace
offerings to make reconciliation for the house of Israel.
thus saith the lord God in the first month in the first day
of the month thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish
and cleanse the sanctuary
and the priest shall take of the blood of the Sin offering
and put it upon the posts of the house and upon the four
corners of the settle of the altar and upon the posts of the
gate of the inner court.
and so thou shalt do the seventh day of the month for every
one that erreth and for him that is simple so shall ye
reconcile the house.
in the first month in the fourteenth day of the month ye
shall have the passover a feast of seven days unleavened
bread shall be eaten.
and upon that day shall the prince prepare for himself and for
all the people of the land a bullock for a Sin offering.
and seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt offering
to the lord seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish
daily the seven days and a kid of the goats daily for a Sin
offering.
and he shall prepare a meat offering of an Ephah for a
bullock and an Ephah for a Ram and an hin of oil for an
Ephah.
in the seventh month in the fifteenth day of the month shall
he do the like in the feast of the seven days according to
the Sin offering according to the burnt offering and
according to the meat offering and according to the oil.
thus saith the lord God the gate of the inner court that
looketh toward the east shall be shut the six working days
but on the sabbath it shall be opened and in the day of the
new moon it shall be opened.
and the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that
gate without and shall stand by the post of the gate and the
priests shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace
offerings and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate
then he shall go forth but the gate shall not be shut until
the evening.
likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of
this gate before the lord in the sabbaths and in the new
moons.
and the burnt offering that the prince shall offer unto the
lord in the sabbath day shall be six lambs without blemish
and a Ram without blemish.
and the meat offering shall be an Ephah for a Ram and the
meat offering for the lambs as he shall be able to give and
an hin of oil to an Ephah.
and in the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock
without blemish and six lambs and a Ram they shall be
without blemish.
and he shall prepare a meat offering an Ephah for a bullock
and an Ephah for a Ram and for the lambs according as his
hand shall attain unto and an hin of oil to an Ephah.
and when the prince shall enter he shall go in by the way of
the porch of that gate and he shall go forth by the way
thereof.
but when the people of the land shall come before the lord in
the solemn feasts he that entereth in by the way of the north
gate to worship shall go out by the way of the south gate and
he that entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth
by the way of the north gate he shall not return by the way
of the gate whereby he came in but shall go forth over
against it.
and the prince in the midst of them when they go in shall go
in and when they go forth shall go forth.
and in the feasts and in the solemnities the meat offering
shall be an Ephah to a bullock and an Ephah to a Ram and to
the lambs as he is able to give and an hin of oil to an
Ephah.
now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering
or peace offerings voluntarily unto the lord one shall then
open him the gate that looketh toward the east and he shall
prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings as he did
on the sabbath day then he shall go forth and after his
going forth one shall shut the gate.
thou shalt daily prepare a burnt offering unto the lord of a
lamb of the first year without blemish thou shalt prepare it
every morning.
and thou shalt prepare a meat offering for it every morning
the sixth part of an Ephah and the third part of an hin of
oil to temper with the fine flour a meat offering
continually by a perpetual ordinance unto the lord.
thus shall they prepare the lamb and the meat offering and
the oil every morning for a continual burnt offering.
thus saith the lord God if the prince give a gift unto any of
his sons the inheritance thereof shall be his sons it shall
be their possession by inheritance.
but if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his
servants then it shall be his to the year of liberty after
it shall return to the prince but his inheritance shall be
his sons for them.
moreover the prince shall not take of the people s inheritance
by oppression to thrust them out of their possession but he
shall give his sons inheritance out of his own possession
that my people be not scattered every man from his possession.
after he brought me through the entry which was at the side
of the gate into the holy chambers of the priests which
looked toward the north and behold there was a place on the
two sides westward.
then said he unto me this is the place where the priests
shall boil the trespass offering and the Sin offering where
they shall bake the meat offering that they bear them not out
into the utter court to sanctify the people.
then he brought me forth into the utter court and caused me
to pass by the four corners of the court and behold in
every corner of the court there was a court.
in the four corners of the court there were courts joined of
forty cubits long and thirty broad these four corners were of
one measure.
and there was a row of building round about in them round
about them four and it was made with boiling places under the
rows round about.
then said he unto me these are the places of them that boil
where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of
the people.
afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house and
behold waters issued out from under the threshold of the
house eastward for the forefront of the house stood toward
the east and the waters came down from under from the right
side of the house at the south side of the altar.
then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward and
led me about the way without unto the utter gate by the way
that looketh eastward and behold there ran out waters on
the right side.
and when the man that had the line in his hand went forth
eastward he measured a thousand cubits and he brought me
through the waters the waters were to the ankles.
again he measured a thousand and brought me through the
waters the waters were to the knees. again he measured a
thousand and brought me through the waters were to the
loins.
afterward he measured a thousand and it was a river that I
could not pass over for the waters were risen waters to swim
in a river that could not be passed over.
and he said unto me son of man hast thou seen this? then he
brought me and caused me to return to the brink of the river.
now when I had returned behold at the bank of the river were
very many trees on the one side and on the other.
then said he unto me these waters issue out toward the east
country and go down into the desert and go into the sea
which being brought forth into the sea the waters shall be
healed.
and it shall come to pass that every thing that liveth which
moveth whithersoever the rivers shall come shall live and
there shall be a very great multitude of fish because these
waters shall come thither for they shall be healed and every
thing shall live whither the river cometh.
and it shall come to pass that the fishers shall stand upon
it from Engedi even unto Eneglaim they shall be a place to
spread forth nets their fish shall be according to their
kinds as the fish of the great sea exceeding many.
but the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not
be healed they shall be given to salt.
and by the river upon the bank thereof on this side and on
that side shall grow all trees for meat whose leaf shall not
fade Neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed it shall
bring forth new fruit according to his months because their
waters they issued out of the sanctuary and the fruit thereof
shall be for meat and the leaf thereof for medicine.
thus saith the lord God this shall be the border whereby ye
shall inherit the land according to the twelve tribes of
Israel Joseph shall have two portions.
and ye shall inherit it one as well as another concerning
the which I lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers
and this land shall fall unto you for inheritance.
and this shall be the border of the land toward the north
side from the great sea the way of Hethlon as men go to
Zedad
Hamath Berothah Sibraim which is between the border of
Damascus and the border of Hamath Hazarhatticon which is by
the coast of Hauran.
and the border from the sea shall be Hazarenan the border of
Damascus and the north northward and the border of Hamath.
and this is the north side.
and the east side ye shall measure from Hauran and from
Damascus and from Gilead and from the land of Israel by
Jordan from the border unto the east sea. and this is the
east side.
and the south side southward from Tamar even to the waters of
strife in Kadesh the river to the great sea. and this is the
south side southward.
the west side also shall be the great sea from the border
till a man come over against Hamath. this is the west side.
so shall ye divide this land unto you according to the tribes
of Israel.
and it shall come to pass that ye shall divide it by Lot for
an inheritance unto you and to the strangers that Sojourn
among you which shall beget children among you and they
shall be unto you as born in the country among the children of
Israel they shall have inheritance with you among the tribes
of Israel.
and it shall come to pass that in what tribe the stranger
sojourneth there shall ye give him his inheritance saith the
lord God.
now these are the names of the tribes. from the north end to
the coast of the way of Hethlon as one goeth to Hamath
Hazarenan the border of Damascus northward to the coast of
Hamath for these are his sides east and west a portion for
Dan.
and by the border of Dan from the east side unto the west
side a portion for Asher.
and by the border of Asher from the east side even unto the
west side a portion for Naphtali.
and by the border of Naphtali from the east side unto the
west side a portion for Manasseh.
and by the border of Manasseh from the east side unto the
west side a portion for Ephraim.
and by the border of Ephraim from the east side even unto the
west side a portion for Reuben.
and by the border of Reuben from the east side unto the west
side a portion for Judah.
and by the border of Judah from the east side unto the west
side shall be the offering which ye shall offer of five and
twenty thousand reeds in breadth and in length as one of the
other parts from the east side unto the west side and the
sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.
the oblation that ye shall offer unto the lord shall be of
five and twenty thousand in length and of Ten thousand in
breadth.
and for them even for the priests shall be this holy
oblation toward the north five and twenty thousand in length
and toward the west Ten thousand in breadth and toward the
east Ten thousand in breadth and toward the south five and
twenty thousand in length and the sanctuary of the lord shall
be in the midst thereof.
it shall be for the priests that are sanctified of the sons of
Zadok which have kept my charge which went not astray when
the children of Israel went astray as the Levites went
astray.
and this oblation of the land that is offered shall be unto
them a thing most holy by the border of the Levites.
and over against the border of the priests the Levites shall
have five and twenty thousand in length and Ten thousand in
breadth all the length shall be five and twenty thousand and
the breadth Ten thousand.
and they shall not sell of it Neither exchange nor alienate
the firstfruits of the land for it is holy unto the lord.
and the five thousand that are left in the breadth over
against the five and twenty thousand shall be a profane place
for the city for dwelling and for suburbs and the city
shall be in the midst thereof.
and these shall be the measures thereof the north side four
thousand and five hundred and the south side four thousand
and five hundred and on the east side four thousand and five
hundred and the west side four thousand and five hundred.
and the suburbs of the city shall be toward the north two
hundred and fifty and toward the south two hundred and fifty
and toward the east two hundred and fifty and toward the west
two hundred and fifty.
and the residue in length over against the oblation of the
holy portion shall be Ten thousand eastward and Ten thousand
westward and it shall be over against the oblation of the
holy portion and the increase thereof shall be for food unto
them that serve the city.
and they that serve the city shall serve it out of all the
tribes of Israel.
all the oblation shall be five and twenty thousand by five and
twenty thousand ye shall offer the holy oblation foursquare
with the possession of the city.
and the residue shall be for the prince on the one side and
on the other of the holy oblation and of the possession of
the city over against the five and twenty thousand of the
oblation toward the east border and westward over against the
five and twenty thousand toward the west border over against
the portions for the prince and it shall be the holy
oblation and the sanctuary of the house shall be in the midst
thereof.
moreover from the possession of the Levites and from the
possession of the city being in the midst of that which is
the prince s between the border of Judah and the border of
Benjamin shall be for the prince.
as for the rest of the tribes from the east side unto the
west side Benjamin shall have a portion.
and by the border of Benjamin from the east side unto the
west side Simeon shall have a portion.
and by the border of Simeon from the east side unto the west
side Issachar a portion.
and by the border of Issachar from the east side unto the
west side Zebulun a portion.
and by the border of Zebulun from the east side unto the west
side Gad a portion.
and by the border of Gad at the south side southward the
border shall be even from Tamar unto the waters of strife in
Kadesh and to the river toward the great sea.
this is the land which ye shall divide by Lot unto the tribes
of Israel for inheritance and these are their portions saith
the lord God.
and these are the goings out of the city on the north side
four thousand and five hundred measures.
and the gates of the city shall be after the names of the
tribes of Israel three gates northward one gate of Reuben
one gate of Judah one gate of Levi.
and at the east side four thousand and five hundred and three
gates and one gate of Joseph one gate of Benjamin one gate
of Dan.
and at the south side four thousand and five hundred measures
and three gates one gate of Simeon one gate of Issachar one
gate of Zebulun.
at the west side four thousand and five hundred with their
three gates one gate of Gad one gate of Asher one gate of
Naphtali.
it was round about eighteen thousand measures and the name of
the city from that day shall be the lord is there.
in the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem and besieged
it.
and the lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand with
part of the vessels of the house of God which he carried into
the land of Shinar to the house of his God and he brought the
vessels into the treasure house of his God.
and the king spake unto Ashpenaz the Master of his eunuchs
that he should bring certain of the children of Israel and of
the king s seed and of the princes
children in whom was no blemish but well favoured and
skilful in all wisdom and cunning in knowledge and
understanding science and such as had ability in them to
stand in the king s palace and whom they might teach the
learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans.
and the king appointed them a daily provision of the king s
meat and of the wine which he drank so nourishing them three
years that at the end thereof they might stand before the
king.
now among these were of the children of Judah Daniel
Hananiah Mishael and Azariah
unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names for he gave
unto Daniel the name of Belteshazzar and to Hananiah of
Shadrach and to Mishael of Meshach and to Azariah of
Abednego.
but Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile
himself with the portion of the king s meat nor with the wine
which he drank therefore he requested of the prince of the
eunuchs that he might not defile himself.
now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love with
the prince of the eunuchs.
and the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel I fear my lord
the king who hath appointed your meat and your drink for why
should he see your faces worse liking than the children which
are of your sort? then shall ye make me endanger my head to
the king.
then said Daniel to Melzar whom the prince of the eunuchs had
set over Daniel Hananiah Mishael and Azariah
prove thy servants I beseech thee Ten days and let them
give us pulse to eat and water to drink.
then let our countenances be looked upon before thee and the
countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the
king s meat and as thou seest deal with thy servants.
so he consented to them in this matter and proved them Ten
days.
and at the end of Ten days their countenances appeared fairer
and fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the
portion of the king s meat.
thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat and the wine
that they should drink and gave them pulse.
as for these four children God gave them knowledge and skill
in all learning and wisdom and Daniel had understanding in
all visions and dreams.
now at the end of the days that the king had said he should
bring them in then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in
before Nebuchadnezzar.
and the king communed with them and among them all was found
none like Daniel Hananiah Mishael and Azariah therefore
stood they before the king.
and in all matters of wisdom and understanding that the king
enquired of them he found them Ten times better than all the
magicians and astrologers that were in all his realm.
and Daniel continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus.
and in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar
Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams wherewith his spirit was
troubled and his sleep brake from him.
then the king commanded to call the magicians and the
astrologers and the sorcerers and the Chaldeans for to shew
the king his dreams. so they came and stood before the king.
and the king said unto them I have dreamed a dream and my
spirit was troubled to know the dream.
then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack O king live
for ever tell thy servants the dream and we will shew the
interpretation.
the king answered and said to the Chaldeans the thing is gone
from me if ye will not make known unto me the dream with the
interpretation thereof ye shall be cut in pieces and your
houses shall be made a dunghill.
but if ye shew the dream and the interpretation thereof ye
shall receive of me gifts and rewards and great honour
therefore shew me the dream and the interpretation thereof.
they answered again and said let the king tell his servants
the dream and we will shew the interpretation of it.
the king answered and said I know of certainty that ye would
gain the time because ye see the thing is gone from me.
but if ye will not make known unto me the dream there is but
one decree for you for ye have prepared lying and corrupt
words to speak before me till the time be changed therefore
tell me the dream and I shall know that ye can shew me the
interpretation thereof.
the Chaldeans answered before the king and said there is not
a man upon the earth that can shew the king s matter
therefore there is no king lord nor ruler that asked such
things at any magician or astrologer or Chaldean.
and it is a rare thing that the king requireth and there is
none other that can shew it before the king except the gods
whose dwelling is not with flesh.
for this cause the king was angry and very furious and
commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
and the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain
and they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.
then Daniel answered with counsel and wisdom to Arioch the
captain of the king s guard which was gone forth to slay the
wise men of Babylon
he answered and said to Arioch the king s captain why is the
decree so hasty from the king? then Arioch made the thing
known to Daniel.
then Daniel went in and desired of the king that he would
give him time and that he would shew the king the
interpretation.
then Daniel went to his house and made the thing known to
Hananiah Mishael and Azariah his companions
that they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning
this secret that Daniel and his fellows should not perish
with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision.
then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
Daniel answered and said blessed be the name of God for ever
and ever for wisdom and might are his
and he changeth the times and the seasons he removeth kings
and setteth up kings he giveth wisdom unto the wise and
knowledge to them that know understanding
he revealeth the deep and secret things he knoweth what is in
the darkness and the light dwelleth with him.
I thank thee and praise thee O thou God of my fathers who
hast given me wisdom and might and hast made known unto me
now what we desired of thee for thou hast now made known unto
us the king s matter.
therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch whom the king had
ordained to destroy the wise men of Babylon he went and said
thus unto him destroy not the wise men of Babylon bring me
in before the king and I will shew unto the king the
interpretation.
then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste and
said thus unto him I have found a man of the captives of
Judah that will make known unto the king the interpretation.
the king answered and said to Daniel whose name was
Belteshazzar art thou able to make known unto me the dream
which I have seen and the interpretation thereof?
Daniel answered in the presence of the king and said the
secret which the king hath demanded cannot the wise men the
astrologers the magicians the soothsayers shew unto the
king
but there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets and
maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the
latter days. thy dream and the visions of thy head upon thy
bed are these
as for thee O king thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy
bed what should come to pass hereafter and he that revealeth
secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to pass.
but as for me this secret is not revealed to me for any
wisdom that I have more than any living but for their sakes
that shall make known the interpretation to the king and that
thou mightest know the thoughts of thy heart.
thou O king sawest and behold a great image. this great
image whose brightness was excellent stood before thee and
the form thereof was terrible.
this image s head was of fine gold his breast and his arms of
Silver his belly and his thighs of brass
his legs of Iron his feet part of Iron and part of clay.
thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands which
smote the image upon his feet that were of Iron and clay and
brake them to pieces.
then was the Iron the clay the brass the Silver and the
gold broken to pieces together and became like the chaff of
the summer threshingfloors and the wind carried them away
that no place was found for them and the stone that smote the
image became a great mountain and filled the whole earth.
this is the dream and we will tell the interpretation thereof
before the king.
thou O king art a king of kings for the God of heaven hath
given thee a kingdom power and strength and glory.
and wheresoever the children of men dwell the beasts of the
field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine
hand and hath made thee ruler over them all. thou art this
head of gold.
and after thee shall Arise another kingdom inferior to thee
and another third kingdom of brass which shall bear rule over
all the earth.
and the fourth kingdom shall be strong as Iron forasmuch as
Iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things and as Iron
that breaketh all these shall it break in pieces and bruise.
and whereas thou sawest the feet and toes part of potters
clay and part of Iron the kingdom shall be divided but
there shall be in it of the strength of the Iron forasmuch as
thou sawest the Iron mixed with miry clay.
and as the toes of the feet were part of Iron and part of
clay so the kingdom shall be partly strong and partly
broken.
and whereas thou sawest Iron mixed with miry clay they shall
mingle themselves with the seed of men but they shall not
cleave one to another even as Iron is not mixed with clay.
and in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up
a kingdom which shall never be destroyed and the kingdom
shall not be left to other people but it shall break in
pieces and consume all these kingdoms and it shall stand for
ever.
forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the
mountain without hands and that it brake in pieces the Iron
the brass the clay the Silver and the gold the great God
hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter
and the dream is certain and the interpretation thereof sure.
then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face and
worshipped Daniel and commanded that they should offer an
oblation and sweet odours unto him.
the king answered unto Daniel and said of a truth it is
that your God is a God of gods and a lord of kings and a
revealer of secrets seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.
then the king made Daniel a great man and gave him many great
gifts and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon
and chief of the governors over all the wise men of Babylon.
then Daniel requested of the king and he set Shadrach
Meshach and Abednego over the affairs of the province of
Babylon but Daniel sat in the gate of the king.
Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold whose height
was threescore cubits and the breadth thereof six cubits he
set it up in the plain of Dura in the province of Babylon.
then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the
princes the governors and the captains the judges the
treasurers the counsellors the sheriffs and all the rulers
of the provinces to come to the dedication of the image which
Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
then the princes the governors and captains the judges the
treasurers the counsellors the sheriffs and all the rulers
of the provinces were gathered together unto the dedication
of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up and they
stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.
then an herald cried aloud to you it is commanded O people
nations and languages
that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet flute
harp sackbut psaltery dulcimer and all kinds of musick ye
fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the
king hath set up
and whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour
be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
therefore at that time when all the people heard the sound of
the cornet flute harp sackbut psaltery and all kinds of
musick all the people the nations and the languages fell
down and worshipped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the
king had set up.
wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near and
accused the Jews.
they spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar O king live
for ever.
thou O king hast made a decree that every man that shall
hear the sound of the cornet flute harp sackbut psaltery
and dulcimer and all kinds of musick shall fall down and
worship the golden image
and whoso falleth not down and worshippeth that he should be
cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
there are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of
the province of Babylon Shadrach Meshach and Abednego
these men O king have not regarded thee they serve not thy
gods nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.
then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring
Shadrach Meshach and Abednego. then they brought these men
before the king.
Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them is it true O
Shadrach Meshach and Abednego do not ye serve my gods nor
worship the golden image which I have set up?
now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the
cornet flute harp sackbut psaltery and dulcimer and all
kinds of musick ye fall down and worship the image which I
have made well but if ye worship not ye shall be cast the
same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace and who
is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?
Shadrach Meshach and Abednego answered and said to the
king O Nebuchadnezzar we are not careful to answer thee in
this matter.
if it be so our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery furnace and he will deliver us out of thine
hand O king.
but if not be it known unto thee O king that we will not
serve thy gods nor worship the golden image which thou hast
set up.
then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury and the form of his
visage was changed against Shadrach Meshach and Abednego
therefore he spake and commanded that they should heat the
furnace one seven times more than it was wont to be heated.
and he commanded the most Mighty men that were in his army to
bind Shadrach Meshach and Abednego and to cast them into
the burning fiery furnace.
then these men were bound in their coats their hosen and
their hats and their other garments and were cast into the
midst of the burning fiery furnace.
therefore because the king s commandment was urgent and the
furnace exceeding hot the flames of the fire slew those men
that took up Shadrach Meshach and Abednego.
and these three men Shadrach Meshach and Abednego fell
down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied and rose up in
haste and spake and said unto his counsellors did not we
cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? they answered
and said unto the king true O king.
he answered and said lo I see four men loose walking in the
midst of the fire and they have no hurt and the form of the
fourth is like the son of God.
then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning
fiery furnace and spake and said Shadrach Meshach and
Abednego ye servants of the most high God come forth and
come hither. then Shadrach Meshach and Abednego came forth
of the midst of the fire.
and the princes governors and captains and the king s
counsellors being gathered together saw these men upon
whose bodies the fire had no power nor was an hair of their
head singed Neither were their coats changed nor the smell
of fire had passed on them.
then Nebuchadnezzar spake and said blessed be the God of
Shadrach Meshach and Abednego who hath sent his angel and
delivered his servants that trusted in him and have changed
the king s word and yielded their bodies that they might not
serve nor worship any God except their own God.
therefore I make a decree that every people nation and
language which speak any thing amiss against the God of
Shadrach Meshach and Abednego shall be cut in pieces and
their houses shall be made a dunghill because there is no
other God that can deliver after this sort.
then the king promoted Shadrach Meshach and Abednego in the
province of Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar the king unto all people nations and
languages that dwell in all the earth peace be multiplied
unto you.
I thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that the high
God hath wrought toward me.
how great are his signs and how Mighty are his wonders his
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom and his dominion is from
generation to generation.
I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house and flourishing in
my palace
I saw a dream which made me afraid and the thoughts upon my
bed and the visions of my head troubled me.
therefore made I a decree to bring in all the wise men of
Babylon before me that they might make known unto me the
interpretation of the dream.
then came in the magicians the astrologers the Chaldeans
and the soothsayers and I told the dream before them but
they did not make known unto me the interpretation thereof.
but at the last Daniel came in before me whose name was
Belteshazzar according to the name of my God and in whom is
the spirit of the holy gods and before him I told the dream
saying
O Belteshazzar Master of the magicians because I know that
the spirit of the holy gods is in thee and no secret
troubleth thee tell me the visions of my dream that I have
seen and the interpretation thereof.
thus were the visions of mine head in my bed I saw and
behold a tree in the midst of the earth and the height
thereof was great.
the tree grew and was strong and the height thereof reached
unto heaven and the sight thereof to the end of all the
earth
the leaves thereof were fair and the fruit thereof Much and
in it was meat for all the beasts of the field had shadow
under it and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs
thereof and all flesh was fed of it.
I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed and behold a
watcher and an holy one came down from heaven
he cried aloud and said thus Hew down the tree and cut off
his branches shake off his leaves and scatter his fruit let
the beasts get away from under it and the fowls from his
branches
nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the earth even
with a band of Iron and brass in the tender grass of the
field and let it be wet with the dew of heaven and let his
portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth
let his heart be changed from man s and let a beast s heart
be given unto him and let seven times pass over him.
this matter is by the decree of the watchers and the demand
by the word of the holy ones to the intent that the living
may know that the most high ruleth in the kingdom of men and
giveth it to whomsoever he will and setteth up over it the
basest of men.
this dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen. now thou O
Belteshazzar declare the interpretation thereof forasmuch as
all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known unto
me the interpretation but thou art able for the spirit of
the holy gods is in thee.
then Daniel whose name was Belteshazzar was astonied for one
hour and his thoughts troubled him. the king spake and said
Belteshazzar let not the dream or the interpretation
thereof trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said my
lord the dream be to them that hate thee and the
interpretation thereof to thine enemies.
the tree that thou sawest which grew and was strong whose
height reached unto the heaven and the sight thereof to all
the earth
whose leaves were fair and the fruit thereof Much and in it
was meat for all under which the beasts of the field dwelt
and upon whose branches the fowls of the heaven had their
habitation
it is thou O king that art grown and become strong for thy
greatness is grown and reacheth unto heaven and thy dominion
to the end of the earth.
and whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down
from heaven and saying Hew the tree down and destroy it
yet leave the stump of the roots thereof in the earth even
with a band of Iron and brass in the tender grass of the
field and let it be wet with the dew of heaven and let his
portion be with the beasts of the field till seven times pass
over him
this is the interpretation O king and this is the decree of
the most high which is come upon my lord the king
that they shall drive thee from men and thy dwelling shall be
with the beasts of the field and they shall make thee to eat
grass as oxen and they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven
and seven times shall pass over thee till thou know that the
most high ruleth in the kingdom of men and giveth it to
whomsoever he will.
and whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the tree
roots thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee after that thou
shalt have known that the heavens do rule.
wherefore O king let my counsel be acceptable unto thee and
break off thy sins by righteousness and thine iniquities by
shewing mercy to the poor if it may be a lengthening of thy
tranquillity.
all this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.
at the end of twelve months he walked in the palace of the
kingdom of Babylon.
the king spake and said is not this great Babylon that I
have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my
power and for the honour of my majesty?
while the word was in the king s mouth there fell a voice
from heaven saying O king Nebuchadnezzar to thee it is
spoken the kingdom is departed from thee.
and they shall drive thee from men and thy dwelling shall be
with the beasts of the field they shall make thee to eat
grass as oxen and seven times shall pass over thee until
thou know that the most high ruleth in the kingdom of men and
giveth it to whomsoever he will.
the same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar and
he was driven from men and did eat grass as oxen and his
body was wet with the dew of heaven till his hairs were grown
like eagles feathers and his nails like birds claws.
and at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine
eyes unto heaven and mine understanding returned unto me and
I blessed the most high and I praised and honoured him that
liveth for ever whose dominion is an everlasting dominion
and his kingdom is from generation to generation
and all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing
and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven and
among the inhabitants of the earth and none can stay his
hand or say unto him what doest thou?
at the same time my reason returned unto me and for the glory
of my kingdom mine honour and brightness returned unto me
and my counsellors and my lords sought unto me and I was
established in my kingdom and excellent majesty was added
unto me.
now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the king of
heaven all whose works are truth and his ways judgment and
those that walk in pride he is able to abase.
Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his
lords and drank wine before the thousand.
Belshazzar whiles he tasted the wine commanded to bring the
golden and Silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had
taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem that the king
and his princes his wives and his concubines might drink
therein.
then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of
the temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem and the
king and his princes his wives and his concubines drank in
them.
they drank wine and praised the gods of gold and of Silver
of brass of Iron of wood and of stone.
in the same hour came forth fingers of a man s hand and wrote
over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of
the king s palace and the king saw the part of the hand that
wrote.
then the king s countenance was changed and his thoughts
troubled him so that the joints of his loins were loosed and
his knees smote one against another.
the king cried aloud to bring in the astrologers the
Chaldeans and the soothsayers. and the king spake and said
to the wise men of Babylon whosoever shall read this writing
and shew me the interpretation thereof shall be clothed with
scarlet and have a chain of gold about his neck and shall be
the third ruler in the kingdom.
then came in all the king s wise men but they could not read
the writing nor make known to the king the interpretation
thereof.
then was king Belshazzar greatly troubled and his countenance
was changed in him and his lords were astonied.
now the queen by reason of the words of the king and his lords
came into the banquet house and the queen spake and said O
king live for ever let not thy thoughts trouble thee nor
let thy countenance be changed
there is a man in thy kingdom in whom is the spirit of the
holy gods and in the days of thy father light and
understanding and wisdom like the wisdom of the gods was
found in him whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father the
king I say thy father made Master of the magicians
astrologers Chaldeans and soothsayers
forasmuch as an excellent spirit and knowledge and
understanding interpreting of dreams and shewing of hard
sentences and dissolving of doubts were found in the same
Daniel whom the king named Belteshazzar now let Daniel be
called and he will shew the interpretation.
then was Daniel brought in before the king. and the king spake
and said unto Daniel art thou that Daniel which art of the
children of the captivity of Judah whom the king my father
brought out of Jewry?
I have even heard of thee that the spirit of the gods is in
thee and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom is
found in thee.
and now the wise men the astrologers have been brought in
before me that they should read this writing and make known
unto me the interpretation thereof but they could not shew
the interpretation of the thing
and I have heard of thee that thou canst make
interpretations and dissolve doubts now if thou canst read
the writing and make known to me the interpretation thereof
thou shalt be clothed with scarlet and have a chain of gold
about thy neck and shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.
then Daniel answered and said before the king let thy gifts
be to thyself and give thy rewards to another yet I will
read the writing unto the king and make known to him the
interpretation.
O thou king the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father
a kingdom and majesty and glory and honour
and for the majesty that he gave him all people nations and
languages trembled and feared before him whom he would he
slew and whom he would he kept alive and whom he would he
set up and whom he would he put down.
but when his heart was lifted up and his mind hardened in
pride he was deposed from his kingly throne and they took
his glory from him
and he was driven from the sons of men and his heart was made
like the beasts and his dwelling was with the wild asses
they fed him with grass like oxen and his body was wet with
the dew of heaven till he knew that the most high God ruled
in the kingdom of men and that he appointeth over it
whomsoever he will.
and thou his son O Belshazzar hast not humbled thine heart
though thou knewest all this
but hast lifted up thyself against the lord of heaven and
they have brought the vessels of his house before thee and
thou and thy lords thy wives and thy concubines have drunk
wine in them and thou hast praised the gods of Silver and
gold of brass Iron wood and stone which see not nor
hear nor know and the God in whose hand thy breath is and
whose are all thy ways hast thou not glorified
then was the part of the hand sent from him and this writing
was written.
and this is the writing that was written Mene Mene Tekel
Upharsin.
this is the interpretation of the thing Mene God hath
numbered thy kingdom and finished it.
Tekel thou art weighed in the balances and art found
wanting.
Peres thy kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and
Persians.
then commanded Belshazzar and they clothed Daniel with
scarlet and put a chain of gold about his neck and made a
proclamation concerning him that he should be the third ruler
in the kingdom.
in that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain.
and Darius the Median took the kingdom being about threescore
and two years old.
it pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and
twenty princes which should be over the whole kingdom
and over these three presidents of whom Daniel was first
that the princes might give accounts unto them and the king
should have no damage.
then this Daniel was preferred above the presidents and
princes because an excellent spirit was in him and the king
thought to set him over the whole realm.
then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion
against Daniel concerning the kingdom but they could find
none occasion nor fault forasmuch as he was faithful Neither
was there any error or fault found in him.
then said these men we shall not find any occasion against
this Daniel except we find it against him concerning the law
of his God.
then these presidents and princes assembled together to the
king and said thus unto him king Darius live for ever.
all the presidents of the kingdom the governors and the
princes the counsellors and the captains have consulted
together to establish a royal statute and to make a firm
decree that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man
for thirty days save of thee O king he shall be cast into
the den of lions.
now O king establish the decree and sign the writing that
it be not changed according to the law of the Medes and
Persians which altereth not.
wherefore king Darius signed the writing and the decree.
now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed he went into
his house and his windows being open in his chamber toward
Jerusalem he kneeled upon his knees three times a day and
prayed and gave thanks before his God as he did aforetime.
then these men assembled and found Daniel praying and making
supplication before his God.
then they came near and spake before the king concerning the
king s decree hast thou not signed a decree that every man
that shall ask a petition of any God or man within thirty
days save of thee O king shall be cast into the den of
lions? the king answered and said the thing is true
according to the law of the Medes and Persians which altereth
not.
then answered they and said before the king that Daniel
which is of the children of the captivity of Judah regardeth
not thee O king nor the decree that thou hast signed but
maketh his petition three times a day.
then the king when he heard these words was sore displeased
with himself and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him and
he laboured till the going down of the sun to deliver him.
then these men assembled unto the king and said unto the
king know O king that the law of the Medes and Persians is
that no decree nor statute which the king establisheth may be
changed.
then the king commanded and they brought Daniel and cast him
into the den of lions. now the king spake and said unto
Daniel thy God whom thou servest continually he will deliver
thee.
and a stone was brought and laid upon the mouth of the den
and the king sealed it with his own signet and with the
signet of his lords that the purpose might not be changed
concerning Daniel.
then the king went to his palace and passed the night
fasting Neither were instruments of musick brought before
him and his sleep went from him.
then the king arose very early in the morning and went in
haste unto the den of lions.
and when he came to the den he cried with a lamentable voice
unto Daniel and the king spake and said to Daniel O Daniel
servant of the living God is thy God whom thou servest
continually able to deliver thee from the lions?
then said Daniel unto the king O king live for ever.
my God hath sent his angel and hath shut the lions mouths
that they have not hurt me forasmuch as before him innocency
was found in me and also before thee O king have I done no
hurt.
then was the king exceedingly glad for him and commanded that
they should take Daniel up out of the den. so Daniel was taken
up out of the den and no manner of hurt was found upon him
because he believed in his God.
and the king commanded and they brought those men which had
accused Daniel and they cast them into the den of lions
them their children and their wives and the lions had the
mastery of them and brake all their bones in pieces or ever
they came at the bottom of the den.
then king Darius wrote unto all people nations and
languages that dwell in all the earth peace be multiplied
unto you.
I make a decree that in every dominion of my kingdom men
tremble and fear before the God of Daniel for he is the
living God and stedfast for ever and his kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed and his dominion shall be even unto
the end.
he delivereth and rescueth and he worketh signs and wonders
in heaven and in earth who hath delivered Daniel from the
power of the lions.
so this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius and in the
reign of Cyrus the Persian.
in the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon Daniel had a
dream and visions of his head upon his bed then he wrote the
dream and told the sum of the matters.
Daniel spake and said I saw in my vision by night and
behold the four winds of the heaven strove upon the great
sea.
and four great beasts came up from the sea diverse one from
another.
the first was like a lion and had eagle s wings I beheld
till the wings thereof were plucked and it was lifted up from
the earth and made stand upon the feet as a man and a man s
heart was given to it.
and behold another beast a second like to a bear and it
raised up itself on one side and it had three ribs in the
mouth of it between the teeth of it and they said thus unto
it Arise devour Much flesh.
after this I beheld and lo another like a leopard which had
upon the back of it four wings of a fowl the beast had also
four heads and dominion was given to it.
after this I saw in the night visions and behold a fourth
beast dreadful and terrible and strong exceedingly and it
had great Iron teeth it devoured and brake in pieces and
stamped the residue with the feet of it and it was diverse
from all the beasts that were before it and it had Ten horns.
I considered the horns and behold there came up among them
another little horn before whom there were three of the first
horns plucked up by the roots and behold in this horn were
eyes like the eyes of man and a mouth speaking great things.
I beheld till the thrones were cast down and the ancient of
days did sit whose garment was white as snow and the hair of
his head like the pure wool his throne was like the fiery
flame and his wheels as burning fire.
a fiery stream issued and came forth from before him thousand
thousands ministered unto him and Ten thousand times Ten
thousand stood before him the judgment was set and the books
were opened.
I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which
the horn spake I beheld even till the beast was slain and
his body destroyed and given to the burning flame.
as concerning the rest of the beasts they had their dominion
taken away yet their lives were prolonged for a season and
time.
I saw in the night visions and behold one like the son of
man came with the clouds of heaven and came to the ancient of
days and they brought him near before him.
and there was given him dominion and glory and a kingdom
that all people nations and languages should serve him his
dominion is an everlasting dominion which shall not pass
away and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.
I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body and
the visions of my head troubled me.
I came near unto one of them that stood by and asked him the
truth of all this. so he told me and made me know the
interpretation of the things.
these great beasts which are four are four kings which
shall Arise out of the earth.
but the saints of the most high shall take the kingdom and
possess the kingdom for ever even for ever and ever.
then I would know the truth of the fourth beast which was
diverse from all the others exceeding dreadful whose teeth
were of Iron and his nails of brass which devoured brake in
pieces and stamped the residue with his feet
and of the Ten horns that were in his head and of the other
which came up and before whom three fell even of that horn
that had eyes and a mouth that spake very great things whose
look was more stout than his fellows.
I beheld and the same horn made war with the saints and
prevailed against them
until the ancient of days came and judgment was given to the
saints of the most high and the time came that the saints
possessed the kingdom.
thus he said the fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom
upon earth which shall be diverse from all kingdoms and
shall devour the whole earth and shall tread it down and
break it in pieces.
and the Ten horns out of this kingdom are Ten kings that shall
Arise and another shall rise after them and he shall be
diverse from the first and he shall subdue three kings.
and he shall speak great words against the most high and
shall wear out the saints of the most high and think to
change times and laws and they shall be given into his hand
until a time and times and the dividing of time.
but the judgment shall sit and they shall take away his
dominion to consume and to destroy it unto the end.
and the kingdom and dominion and the greatness of the kingdom
under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the
saints of the most high whose kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom and all dominions shall serve and obey him.
hitherto is the end of the matter. as for me Daniel my
cogitations Much troubled me and my countenance changed in
me but I kept the matter in my heart.
in the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar a vision
appeared unto me even unto me Daniel after that which
appeared unto me at the first.
and I saw in a vision and it came to pass when I saw that I
was at Shushan in the palace which is in the province of
Elam and I saw in a vision and I was by the river of Ulai.
then I lifted up mine eyes and saw and behold there stood
before the river a Ram which had two horns and the two horns
were high but one was higher than the other and the higher
came up last.
I saw the Ram pushing westward and northward and southward
so that no beasts might stand before him Neither was there
any that could deliver out of his hand but he did according
to his will and became great.
and as I was considering behold an he goat came from the
west on the face of the whole earth and touched not the
ground and the goat had a notable horn between his eyes.
and he came to the Ram that had two horns which I had seen
standing before the river and ran unto him in the fury of his
power.
and I saw him come close unto the Ram and he was moved with
choler against him and smote the Ram and brake his two
horns and there was no power in the Ram to stand before him
but he cast him down to the ground and stamped upon him and
there was none that could deliver the Ram out of his hand.
therefore the he goat waxed very great and when he was
strong the great horn was broken and for it came up four
notable ones toward the four winds of heaven.
and out of one of them came forth a little horn which waxed
exceeding great toward the south and toward the east and
toward the pleasant land.
and it waxed great even to the host of heaven and it cast
down some of the host and of the stars to the ground and
stamped upon them.
yea he magnified himself even to the prince of the host and
by him the daily sacrifice was taken away and the place of
the sanctuary was cast down.
and an host was given him against the daily sacrifice by
reason of transgression and it cast down the truth to the
ground and it practised and prospered.
then I heard one saint speaking and another saint said unto
that certain saint which spake how long shall be the vision
concerning the daily sacrifice and the transgression of
desolation to give both the sanctuary and the host to be
trodden under foot?
and he said unto me unto two thousand and three hundred days
then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.
and it came to pass when I even I Daniel had seen the
vision and sought for the meaning then behold there stood
before me as the appearance of a man.
and I heard a man s voice between the banks of Ulai which
called and said Gabriel make this man to understand the
vision.
so he came near where I stood and when he came I was afraid
and fell upon my face but he said unto me understand O son
of man for at the time of the end shall be the vision.
now as he was speaking with me I was in a deep sleep on my
face toward the ground but he touched me and set me upright.
and he said behold I will make thee know what shall be in
the last end of the indignation for at the time appointed the
end shall be.
the Ram which thou sawest having two horns are the kings of
Media and Persia.
and the rough goat is the king of Grecia and the great horn
that is between his eyes is the first king.
now that being broken whereas four stood up for it four
kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation but not in his
power.
and in the latter time of their kingdom when the
transgressors are come to the full a king of fierce
countenance and understanding dark sentences shall stand up.
and his power shall be Mighty but not by his own power and
he shall destroy wonderfully and shall prosper and practise
and shall destroy the Mighty and the holy people.
and through his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in
his hand and he shall magnify himself in his heart and by
peace shall destroy many he shall also stand up against the
prince of princes but he shall be broken without hand.
and the vision of the evening and the morning which was told
is true wherefore shut thou up the vision for it shall be
for many days.
and I Daniel fainted and was sick certain days afterward I
rose up and did the king s business and I was astonished at
the vision but none understood it.
in the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus of the seed
of the Medes which was made king over the realm of the
Chaldeans
in the first year of his reign I Daniel understood by books
the number of the years whereof the word of the lord came to
Jeremiah the prophet that he would accomplish seventy years
in the desolations of Jerusalem.
and I set my face unto the lord God to seek by prayer and
supplications with fasting and sackcloth and ashes
and I prayed unto the lord my God and made my confession and
said O lord the great and dreadful God keeping the covenant
and mercy to them that love him and to them that keep his
commandments
we have sinned and have committed iniquity and have done
wickedly and have rebelled even by departing from thy
precepts and from thy judgments
Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets
which spake in thy name to our kings our princes and our
fathers and to all the people of the land.
O lord righteousness belongeth unto thee but unto us
confusion of faces as at this day to the men of Judah and
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and unto all Israel that are
near and that are far off through all the countries whither
thou hast driven them because of their trespass that they
have trespassed against thee.
O lord to us belongeth confusion of face to our kings to
our princes and to our fathers because we have sinned
against thee.
to the lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses though
we have rebelled against him
Neither have we obeyed the voice of the lord our God to walk
in his laws which he set before us by his servants the
prophets.
yea all Israel have transgressed thy law even by departing
that they might not obey thy voice therefore the curse is
poured upon us and the oath that is written in the law of
Moses the servant of God because we have sinned against him.
and he hath confirmed his words which he spake against us
and against our judges that judged us by bringing upon us a
great evil for under the whole heaven hath not been done as
hath been done upon Jerusalem.
as it is written in the law of Moses all this evil is come
upon us yet made we not our prayer before the lord our God
that we might turn from our iniquities and understand thy
truth.
therefore hath the lord watched upon the evil and brought it
upon us for the lord our God is righteous in all his works
which he doeth for we obeyed not his voice.
and now O lord our God that hast brought thy people forth
out of the land of Egypt with a Mighty hand and hast gotten
thee renown as at this day we have sinned we have done
wickedly.
O lord according to all thy righteousness I beseech thee
let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city
Jerusalem thy holy mountain because for our sins and for
the iniquities of our fathers Jerusalem and thy people are
become a reproach to all that are about us.
now therefore O our God hear the prayer of thy servant and
his supplications and cause thy face to shine upon thy
sanctuary that is desolate for the lord s sake.
O my God incline thine ear and hear open thine eyes and
behold our desolations and the city which is called by thy
name for we do not present our supplications before thee for
our righteousnesses but for thy great mercies.
O lord hear O lord forgive O lord hearken and do defer
not for thine own sake O my God for thy city and thy people
are called by thy name.
and whiles I was speaking and praying and confessing my Sin
and the Sin of my people Israel and presenting my
supplication before the lord my God for the holy mountain of
my God
yea whiles I was speaking in prayer even the man Gabriel
whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning being caused
to fly swiftly touched me about the time of the evening
oblation.
and he informed me and talked with me and said O Daniel I
Am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding.
at the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came
forth and I Am come to shew thee for thou art greatly
beloved therefore understand the matter and consider the
vision.
seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy
city to finish the transgression and to make an end of sins
and to make reconciliation for iniquity and to bring in
everlasting righteousness and to seal up the vision and
prophecy and to anoint the most holy.
know therefore and understand that from the going forth of
the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the
Messiah the prince shall be seven weeks and threescore and
two weeks the street shall be built again and the wall even
in troublous times.
and after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off
but not for himself and the people of the prince that shall
come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary and the end
thereof shall be with a flood and unto the end of the war
desolations are determined.
and he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week and
in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the
oblation to cease and for the overspreading of abominations
he shall make it desolate even until the consummation and
that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.
in the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed
unto Daniel whose name was called Belteshazzar and the thing
was true but the time appointed was long and he understood
the thing and had understanding of the vision.
in those days I Daniel was mourning three full weeks.
I ate no pleasant bread Neither came flesh nor wine in my
mouth Neither did I anoint myself at all till three whole
weeks were fulfilled.
and in the four and twentieth day of the first month as I was
by the side of the great river which is Hiddekel
then I lifted up mine eyes and looked and behold a certain
man clothed in linen whose loins were girded with fine gold
of Uphaz
his body also was like the beryl and his face as the
appearance of lightning and his eyes as lamps of fire and
his arms and his feet like in colour to polished brass and
the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude.
and I Daniel alone saw the vision for the men that were with
me saw not the vision but a great quaking fell upon them so
that they fled to hide themselves.
therefore I was left alone and saw this great vision and
there remained no strength in me for my comeliness was turned
in me into corruption and I retained no strength.
yet heard I the voice of his words and when I heard the voice
of his words then was I in a deep sleep on my face and my
face toward the ground.
and behold an hand touched me which set me upon my knees
and upon the palms of my hands.
and he said unto me O Daniel a man greatly beloved
understand the words that I speak unto thee and stand
upright for unto thee Am I now sent. and when he had spoken
this word unto me I stood trembling.
then said he unto me fear not Daniel for from the first day
that thou didst set thine heart to understand and to chasten
thyself before thy God thy words were heard and I Am come
for thy words.
but the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one and
twenty days but lo Michael one of the chief princes came
to help me and I remained there with the kings of Persia.
now I Am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy
people in the latter days for yet the vision is for many
days.
and when he had spoken such words unto me I set my face
toward the ground and I became dumb.
and behold one like the similitude of the sons of men
touched my lips then I opened my mouth and spake and said
unto him that stood before me O my lord by the vision my
sorrows are turned upon me and I have retained no strength.
for how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my
lord? for as for me straightway there remained no strength in
me Neither is there breath left in me.
then there came again and touched me one like the appearance
of a man and he strengthened me
and said O man greatly beloved fear not peace be unto thee
be strong yea be strong. and when he had spoken unto me I
was strengthened and said let my lord speak for thou hast
strengthened me.
then said he knowest thou wherefore I come unto thee? and now
will I return to fight with the prince of Persia and when I
Am gone forth lo the prince of Grecia shall come.
but I will shew thee that which is noted in the scripture of
truth and there is none that holdeth with me in these things
but Michael your prince.
also I in the first year of Darius the Mede even I stood to
confirm and to strengthen him.
and now will I shew thee the truth. behold there shall stand
up yet three kings in Persia and the fourth shall be far
richer than they all and by his strength through his Riches
he shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia.
and a Mighty king shall stand up that shall rule with great
dominion and do according to his will.
and when he shall stand up his kingdom shall be broken and
shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven and not to
his posterity nor according to his dominion which he ruled
for his kingdom shall be plucked up even for others beside
those.
and the king of the south shall be strong and one of his
princes and he shall be strong above him and have dominion
his dominion shall be a great dominion.
and in the end of years they shall join themselves together
for the king s daughter of the south shall come to the king of
the north to make an agreement but she shall not retain the
power of the arm Neither shall he stand nor his arm but she
shall be given up and they that brought her and he that
begat her and he that strengthened her in these times.
but out of a branch of her roots shall one stand up in his
estate which shall come with an army and shall enter into
the fortress of the king of the north and shall deal against
them and shall prevail
and shall also carry captives into Egypt their gods with
their princes and with their precious vessels of Silver and
of gold and he shall continue more years than the king of the
north.
so the king of the south shall come into his kingdom and
shall return into his own land.
but his sons shall be stirred up and shall assemble a
multitude of great forces and one shall certainly come and
overflow and pass through then shall he return and be
stirred up even to his fortress.
and the king of the south shall be moved with choler and
shall come forth and fight with him even with the king of the
north and he shall set forth a great multitude but the
multitude shall be given into his hand.
and when he hath taken away the multitude his heart shall be
lifted up and he shall cast down many Ten thousands but he
shall not be strengthened by it.
for the king of the north shall return and shall set forth a
multitude greater than the former and shall certainly come
after certain years with a great army and with Much Riches.
and in those times there shall many stand up against the king
of the south also the robbers of thy people shall exalt
themselves to establish the vision but they shall fall.
so the king of the north shall come and cast up a mount and
take the most fenced cities and the arms of the south shall
not withstand Neither his chosen people Neither shall there
be any strength to withstand.
but he that cometh against him shall do according to his own
will and none shall stand before him and he shall stand in
the glorious land which by his hand shall be consumed.
he shall also set his face to enter with the strength of his
whole kingdom and upright ones with him thus shall he do
and he shall give him the daughter of women corrupting her
but she shall not stand on his side Neither be for him.
after this shall he turn his face unto the isles and shall
take many but a prince for his own behalf shall cause the
reproach offered by him to cease without his own reproach he
shall cause it to turn upon him.
then he shall turn his face toward the fort of his own land
but he shall stumble and fall and not be found.
then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the
glory of the kingdom but within few days he shall be
destroyed Neither in anger nor in battle.
and in his estate shall stand up a vile person to whom they
shall not give the honour of the kingdom but he shall come in
peaceably and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.
and with the arms of a flood shall they be overflown from
before him and shall be broken yea also the prince of the
covenant.
and after the league made with him he shall work deceitfully
for he shall come up and shall become strong with a small
people.
he shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places of the
province and he shall do that which his fathers have not
done nor his fathers fathers he shall scatter among them
the prey and spoil and Riches yea and he shall forecast
his devices against the strong holds even for a time.
and he shall stir up his power and his courage against the
king of the south with a great army and the king of the south
shall be stirred up to battle with a very great and Mighty
army but he shall not stand for they shall forecast devices
against him.
yea they that feed of the portion of his meat shall destroy
him and his army shall overflow and many shall fall down
slain.
and both of these kings hearts shall be to do mischief and
they shall speak lies at one table but it shall not prosper
for yet the end shall be at the time appointed.
then shall he return into his land with great Riches and his
heart shall be against the holy covenant and he shall do
exploits and return to his own land.
at the time appointed he shall return and come toward the
south but it shall not be as the former or as the latter.
for the ships of Chittim shall come against him therefore he
shall be grieved and return and have indignation against the
holy covenant so shall he do he shall even return and have
intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant.
and arms shall stand on his part and they shall pollute the
sanctuary of strength and shall take away the daily
sacrifice and they shall place the abomination that maketh
desolate.
and such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt
by flatteries but the people that do know their God shall be
strong and do exploits.
and they that understand among the people shall instruct many
yet they shall fall by the sword and by flame by captivity
and by spoil many days.
now when they shall fall they shall be holpen with a little
help but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.
and some of them of understanding shall fall to try them and
to purge and to make them white even to the time of the end
because it is yet for a time appointed.
and the king shall do according to his will and he shall
exalt himself and magnify himself above every God and shall
speak marvellous things against the God of gods and shall
prosper till the indignation be accomplished for that that is
determined shall be done.
Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers nor the desire
of women nor regard any God for he shall magnify himself
above all.
but in his estate shall he honour the God of forces and a God
whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with gold and
Silver and with precious stones and pleasant things.
thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange God
whom he shall acknowledge and increase with glory and he
shall cause them to rule over many and shall divide the land
for gain.
and at the time of the end shall the king of the south push at
him and the king of the north shall come against him like a
whirlwind with chariots and with horsemen and with many
ships and he shall enter into the countries and shall
overflow and pass over.
he shall enter also into the glorious land and many countries
shall be overthrown but these shall escape out of his hand
even Edom and Moab and the chief of the children of Ammon.
he shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries and
the land of Egypt shall not escape.
but he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of
Silver and over all the precious things of Egypt and the
Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps.
but tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble
him therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy
and utterly to make away many.
and he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the
seas in the glorious holy mountain yet he shall come to his
end and none shall help him.
and at that time shall Michael stand up the great prince
which standeth for the children of thy people and there shall
be a time of trouble such as never was since there was a
nation even to that same time and at that time thy people
shall be delivered every one that shall be found written in
the book.
and many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake some to everlasting life and some to shame and
everlasting contempt.
and they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament and they that turn many to righteousness as the
stars for ever and ever.
but thou O Daniel shut up the words and seal the book even
to the time of the end many shall run to and fro and
knowledge shall be increased.
then I Daniel looked and behold there stood other two the
one on this side of the bank of the river and the other on
that side of the bank of the river.
and one said to the man clothed in linen which was upon the
waters of the river how long shall it be to the end of these
wonders?
and I heard the man clothed in linen which was upon the
waters of the river when he held up his right hand and his
left hand unto heaven and sware by him that liveth for ever
that it shall be for a time times and an half and when he
shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy
people all these things shall be finished.
and I heard but I understood not then said I O my lord
what shall be the end of these things?
and he said go thy way Daniel for the words are closed up
and sealed till the time of the end.
many shall be purified and made white and tried but the
wicked shall do wickedly and none of the wicked shall
understand but the wise shall understand.
and from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken
away and the abomination that maketh desolate set up there
shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days.
blessed is he that waiteth and cometh to the thousand three
hundred and five and thirty days.
but go thou thy way till the end be for thou shalt rest and
stand in thy Lot at the end of the days.
the word of the lord that came unto Hosea the son of Beeri
in the days of Uzziah Jotham Ahaz and Hezekiah kings of
Judah and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of
Israel.
the beginning of the word of the lord by Hosea. and the lord
said to Hosea go take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and
children of whoredoms for the land hath committed great
whoredom departing from the lord.
so he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim which
conceived and bare him a son.
and the lord said unto him call his name Jezreel for yet a
little while and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the
house of Jehu and will cause to cease the kingdom of the
house of Israel.
and it shall come to pass at that day that I will break the
bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.
and she conceived again and bare a daughter. and God said
unto him call her name Loruhamah for I will no more have
mercy upon the house of Israel but I will utterly take them
away.
but I will have mercy upon the house of Judah and will save
them by the lord their God and will not save them by bow nor
by sword nor by battle by horses nor by horsemen.
now when she had weaned Loruhamah she conceived and bare a
son.
then said God call his name Loammi for ye are not my people
and I will not be your God.
yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand
of the sea which cannot be measured nor numbered and it
shall come to pass that in the place where it was said unto
them ye are not my people there it shall be said unto them
ye are the sons of the living God.
then shall the children of Judah and the children of Israel be
gathered together and appoint themselves one head and they
shall come up out of the land for great shall be the day of
Jezreel.
say ye unto your brethren Ammi and to your sisters Ruhamah.
plead with your mother plead for she is not my wife Neither
Am I her husband let her therefore put away her whoredoms out
of her sight and her adulteries from between her breasts
lest I strip her naked and set her as in the day that she was
born and make her as a wilderness and set her like a dry
land and slay her with thirst.
and I will not have mercy upon her children for they be the
children of whoredoms.
for their mother hath played the harlot she that conceived
them hath done shamefully for she said I will go after my
lovers that give me my bread and my water my wool and my
flax mine oil and my drink.
therefore behold I will hedge up thy way with thorns and
make a wall that she shall not find her paths.
and she shall follow after her lovers but she shall not
overtake them and she shall seek them but shall not find
them then shall she say I will go and return to my first
husband for then was it better with me than now.
for she did not know that I gave her corn and wine and oil
and multiplied her Silver and gold which they prepared for
Baal.
therefore will I return and take away my corn in the time
thereof and my wine in the season thereof and will recover
my wool and my flax given to cover her nakedness.
and now will I discover her lewdness in the sight of her
lovers and none shall deliver her out of mine hand.
I will also cause all her mirth to cease her feast days her
new moons and her sabbaths and all her solemn feasts.
and I will destroy her vines and her fig trees whereof she
hath said these are my rewards that my lovers have given me
and I will make them a forest and the beasts of the field
shall eat them.
and I will visit upon her the days of Baalim wherein she
burned incense to them and she decked herself with her
earrings and her jewels and she went after her lovers and
forgat me saith the lord.
therefore behold I will allure her and bring her into the
wilderness and speak comfortably unto her.
and I will give her her vineyards from thence and the valley
of Achor for a door of hope and she shall sing there as in
the days of her youth and as in the day when she came up out
of the land of Egypt.
and it shall be at that day saith the lord that thou shalt
call me Ishi and shalt call me no more Baali.
for I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth and
they shall no more be remembered by their name.
and in that day will I make a covenant for them with the
beasts of the field and with the fowls of heaven and with the
creeping things of the ground and I will break the bow and
the sword and the battle out of the earth and will make them
to lie down safely.
and I will betroth thee unto me for ever yea I will betroth
thee unto me in righteousness and in judgment and in
lovingkindness and in mercies.
I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness and thou
shalt know the lord.
and it shall come to pass in that day I will hear saith the
lord I will hear the heavens and they shall hear the earth
and the earth shall hear the corn and the wine and the oil
and they shall hear Jezreel.
and I will sow her unto me in the earth and I will have mercy
upon her that had not obtained mercy and I will say to them
which were not my people thou art my people and they shall
say thou art my God.
then said the lord unto me go yet love a woman beloved of
her friend yet an adulteress according to the love of the
lord toward the children of Israel who look to other gods
and love flagons of wine.
so I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of Silver and for an
homer of barley and an half homer of barley
and I said unto her thou shalt abide for me many days thou
shalt not play the harlot and thou shalt not be for another
man so will I also be for thee.
for the children of Israel shall abide many days without a
king and without a prince and without a sacrifice and
without an image and without an Ephod and without teraphim
afterward shall the children of Israel return and seek the
lord their God and David their king and shall fear the lord
and his goodness in the latter days.
hear the word of the lord ye children of Israel for the lord
hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land because
there is no truth nor mercy nor knowledge of God in the
land.
by swearing and lying and killing and stealing and
committing adultery they break out and blood toucheth blood.
therefore shall the land mourn and every one that dwelleth
therein shall languish with the beasts of the field and with
the fowls of heaven yea the fishes of the sea also shall be
taken away.
yet let no man strive nor reprove another for thy people are
as they that strive with the priest.
therefore shalt thou fall in the day and the prophet also
shall fall with thee in the night and I will destroy thy
mother.
my people are destroyed for lack of knowledge because thou
hast rejected knowledge I will also reject thee that thou
shalt be no priest to me seeing thou hast forgotten the law
of thy God I will also forget thy children.
as they were increased so they sinned against me therefore
will I change their glory into shame.
they eat up the Sin of my people and they set their heart on
their iniquity.
and there shall be like people like priest and I will
punish them for their ways and reward them their doings.
for they shall eat and not have enough they shall commit
whoredom and shall not increase because they have left off
to take heed to the lord.
whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart.
my people ask counsel at their stocks and their staff
declareth unto them for the spirit of whoredoms hath caused
them to err and they have gone a whoring from under their
God.
they sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains and burn
incense upon the hills under oaks and poplars and elms
because the shadow thereof is good therefore your daughters
shall commit whoredom and your spouses shall commit adultery.
I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom
nor your spouses when they commit adultery for themselves are
separated with whores and they sacrifice with harlots
therefore the people that doth not understand shall fall.
though thou Israel play the harlot yet let not Judah
offend and come not ye unto Gilgal Neither go ye up to
Bethaven nor swear the lord liveth.
for Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer now the lord
will feed them as a lamb in a large place.
Ephraim is joined to idols let him alone.
their drink is sour they have committed whoredom continually
her rulers with shame do love give ye.
the wind hath bound her up in her wings and they shall be
ashamed because of their sacrifices.
hear ye this O priests and hearken ye house of Israel and
give ye ear O house of the king for judgment is toward you
because ye have been a snare on Mizpah and a net spread upon
Tabor.
and the revolters are profound to make slaughter though I
have been a rebuker of them all.
I know Ephraim and Israel is not hid from me for now O
Ephraim thou committest whoredom and Israel is defiled.
they will not frame their doings to turn unto their God for
the spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them and they have
not known the lord.
and the pride of Israel doth testify to his face therefore
shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity Judah also
shall fall with them.
they shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek
the lord but they shall not find him he hath withdrawn
himself from them.
they have dealt treacherously against the lord for they have
begotten strange children now shall a month devour them with
their portions.
blow ye the cornet in Gibeah and the trumpet in Ramah cry
aloud at Bethaven after thee O Benjamin.
Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke among the
tribes of Israel have I made known that which shall surely be.
the princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound
therefore I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.
Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment because he
willingly walked after the commandment.
therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth and to the house
of Judah as rottenness.
when Ephraim saw his sickness and Judah saw his wound then
went Ephraim to the Assyrian and sent to king Jareb yet
could he not heal you nor cure you of your wound.
for I will be unto Ephraim as a lion and as a young lion to
the house of Judah I even I will tear and go away I will
take away and none shall rescue him.
I will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their
offence and seek my face in their affliction they will seek
me early.
come and let us return unto the lord for he hath torn and
he will heal us he hath smitten and he will bind us up.
after two days will he revive us in the third day he will
raise us up and we shall live in his sight.
then shall we know if we follow on to know the lord his
going forth is prepared as the morning and he shall come unto
us as the rain as the latter and former rain unto the earth.
O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O Judah what shall I do
unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud and as the
early dew it goeth away.
therefore have I hewed them by the prophets I have slain them
by the words of my mouth and thy judgments are as the light
that goeth forth.
for I desired mercy and not sacrifice and the knowledge of
God more than burnt offerings.
but they like men have transgressed the covenant there have
they dealt treacherously against me.
Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity and is polluted
with blood.
and as troops of robbers wait for a man so the company of
priests murder in the way by consent for they commit
lewdness.
I have seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel there is
the whoredom of Ephraim Israel is defiled.
also O Judah he hath set an harvest for thee when I
returned the captivity of my people.
when I would have healed Israel then the iniquity of Ephraim
was discovered and the wickedness of Samaria for they commit
falsehood and the thief cometh in and the troop of robbers
spoileth without.
and they consider not in their hearts that I remember all
their wickedness now their own doings have beset them about
they are before my face.
they make the king glad with their wickedness and the princes
with their lies.
they are all adulterers as an oven heated by the baker who
ceaseth from raising after he hath kneaded the dough until it
be leavened.
in the day of our king the princes have made him sick with
bottles of wine he stretched out his hand with scorners.
for they have made ready their heart like an oven whiles they
lie in wait their baker sleepeth all the night in the
morning it burneth as a flaming fire.
they are all hot as an oven and have devoured their judges
all their kings are fallen there is none among them that
calleth unto me.
Ephraim he hath mixed himself among the people Ephraim is a
cake not turned.
strangers have devoured his strength and he knoweth it not
yea gray hairs are here and there upon him yet he knoweth
not.
and the pride of Israel testifieth to his face and they do
not return to the lord their God nor seek him for all this.
Ephraim also is like a silly dove without heart they call to
Egypt they go to Assyria.
when they shall go I will spread my net upon them I will
bring them down as the fowls of the heaven I will chastise
them as their congregation hath heard.
woe unto them for they have fled from me destruction unto
them because they have transgressed against me though I have
redeemed them yet they have spoken lies against me.
and they have not cried unto me with their heart when they
howled upon their beds they assemble themselves for corn and
wine and they rebel against me.
though I have bound and strengthened their arms yet do they
imagine mischief against me.
they return but not to the most high they are like a
deceitful bow their princes shall fall by the sword for the
rage of their tongue this shall be their derision in the land
of Egypt.
set the trumpet to thy mouth. he shall come as an eagle
against the house of the lord because they have transgressed
my covenant and trespassed against my law.
Israel shall cry unto me my God we know thee.
Israel hath cast off the thing that is good the enemy shall
pursue him.
they have set up kings but not by me they have made princes
and I knew it not of their Silver and their gold have they
made them idols that they may be cut off.
thy calf O Samaria hath cast thee off mine anger is kindled
against them how long will it be ere they attain to
innocency?
for from Israel was it also the workman made it therefore it
is not God but the calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.
for they have sown the wind and they shall reap the
whirlwind it hath no stalk the bud shall yield no meal if
so be it yield the strangers shall swallow it up.
Israel is swallowed up now shall they be among the Gentiles
as a vessel wherein is no pleasure.
for they are gone up to Assyria a wild ass alone by himself
Ephraim hath hired lovers.
yea though they have hired among the nations now will I
gather them and they shall sorrow a little for the burden of
the king of princes.
because Ephraim hath made many altars to Sin altars shall be
unto him to Sin.
I have written to him the great things of my law but they
were counted as a strange thing.
they sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offerings and
eat it but the lord accepteth them not now will he remember
their iniquity and visit their sins they shall return to
Egypt.
for Israel hath forgotten his maker and buildeth temples and
Judah hath multiplied fenced cities but I will send a fire
upon his cities and it shall devour the palaces thereof.
rejoice not O Israel for joy as other people for thou hast
gone a whoring from thy God thou hast loved a reward upon
every cornfloor.
the floor and the winepress shall not feed them and the new
wine shall fail in her.
they shall not dwell in the lord s land but Ephraim shall
return to Egypt and they shall eat unclean things in Assyria.
they shall not offer wine offerings to the lord Neither shall
they be pleasing unto him their sacrifices shall be unto them
as the bread of mourners all that eat thereof shall be
polluted for their bread for their soul shall not come into
the house of the lord.
what will ye do in the solemn day and in the day of the feast
of the lord?
for lo they are gone because of destruction Egypt shall
gather them up Memphis shall bury them the pleasant places
for their Silver nettles shall possess them thorns shall be
in their tabernacles.
the days of visitation are come the days of recompence are
come Israel shall know it the prophet is a fool the
spiritual man is mad for the multitude of thine iniquity and
the great hatred.
the watchman of Ephraim was with my God but the prophet is a
snare of a fowler in all his ways and hatred in the house of
his God.
they have deeply corrupted themselves as in the days of
Gibeah therefore he will remember their iniquity he will
visit their sins.
I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness I saw your
fathers as the firstripe in the fig tree at her first time
but they went to Baalpeor and separated themselves unto that
shame and their abominations were according as they loved.
as for Ephraim their glory shall fly away like a bird from
the birth and from the womb and from the conception.
though they bring up their children yet will I bereave them
that there shall not be a man left yea woe also to them when
I depart from them
Ephraim as I saw Tyrus is planted in a pleasant place but
Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer.
give them O lord what wilt thou give? give them a
miscarrying womb and dry breasts.
all their wickedness is in Gilgal for there I hated them for
the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of mine
house I will love them no more all their princes are
revolters.
Ephraim is smitten their root is dried up they shall bear no
fruit yea though they bring forth yet will I slay even the
beloved fruit of their womb.
my God will cast them away because they did not hearken unto
him and they shall be wanderers among the nations.
Israel is an empty vine he bringeth forth fruit unto himself
according to the multitude of his fruit he hath increased the
altars according to the goodness of his land they have made
goodly images.
their heart is divided now shall they be found faulty he
shall break down their altars he shall spoil their images.
for now they shall say we have no king because we feared not
the lord what then should a king do to us?
they have spoken words swearing falsely in making a covenant
thus judgment springeth up as hemlock in the furrows of the
field.
the inhabitants of Samaria shall fear because of the calves of
Bethaven for the people thereof shall mourn over it and the
priests thereof that rejoiced on it for the glory thereof
because it is departed from it.
it shall be also carried unto Assyria for a present to king
Jareb Ephraim shall receive shame and Israel shall be
ashamed of his own counsel.
as for Samaria her king is cut off as the foam upon the
water.
the high places also of Aven the Sin of Israel shall be
destroyed the thorn and the thistle shall come up on their
altars and they shall say to the mountains cover us and to
the hills fall on us.
O Israel thou hast sinned from the days of Gibeah there they
stood the battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity
did not overtake them.
it is in my desire that I should chastise them and the people
shall be gathered against them when they shall bind
themselves in their two furrows.
and Ephraim is as an heifer that is taught and loveth to
tread out the corn but I passed over upon her fair neck I
will make Ephraim to ride Judah shall plow and Jacob shall
break his clods.
sow to yourselves in righteousness reap in mercy break up
your fallow ground for it is time to seek the lord till he
come and rain righteousness upon you.
ye have plowed wickedness ye have reaped iniquity ye have
eaten the fruit of lies because thou didst trust in thy way
in the multitude of thy Mighty men.
therefore shall a tumult Arise among thy people and all thy
fortresses shall be spoiled as Shalman spoiled Betharbel in
the day of battle the mother was dashed in pieces upon her
children.
so shall Bethel do unto you because of your great wickedness
in a morning shall the king of Israel utterly be cut off.
when Israel was a child then I loved him and called my son
out of Egypt.
as they called them so they went from them they sacrificed
unto Baalim and burned incense to graven images.
I taught Ephraim also to go taking them by their arms but
they knew not that I healed them.
I drew them with cords of a man with Bands of love and I was
to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws and I
laid meat unto them.
he shall not return into the land of Egypt and the Assyrian
shall be his king because they refused to return.
and the sword shall abide on his cities and shall consume his
branches and devour them because of their own counsels.
and my people are bent to backsliding from me though they
called them to the most high none at all would exalt him.
how shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee
Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee
as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me my repentings are
kindled together.
I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger I will not
return to destroy Ephraim for I Am God and not man the holy
one in the midst of thee and I will not enter into the city.
they shall walk after the lord he shall roar like a lion
when he shall roar then the children shall tremble from the
west.
they shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt and as a dove out
of the land of Assyria and I will place them in their houses
saith the lord.
Ephraim compasseth me about with lies and the house of Israel
with deceit but Judah yet ruleth with God and is faithful
with the saints.
Ephraim feedeth on wind and followeth after the east wind he
daily increaseth lies and desolation and they do make a
covenant with the Assyrians and oil is carried into Egypt.
the lord hath also a controversy with Judah and will punish
Jacob according to his ways according to his doings will he
recompense him.
he took his brother by the heel in the womb and by his
strength he had power with God
yea he had power over the angel and prevailed he wept and
made supplication unto him he found him in Bethel and there
he spake with us
even the lord God of hosts the lord is his memorial.
therefore turn thou to thy God keep mercy and judgment and
wait on thy God continually.
he is a merchant the balances of deceit are in his hand he
loveth to oppress.
and Ephraim said yet I Am become rich I have found me out
substance in all my labours they shall find none iniquity in
me that were Sin.
and I that Am the lord thy God from the land of Egypt will yet
make thee to dwell in tabernacles as in the days of the
solemn feast.
I have also spoken by the prophets and I have multiplied
visions and used similitudes by the ministry of the
prophets.
is there iniquity in Gilead? surely they are vanity they
sacrifice bullocks in Gilgal yea their altars are as heaps
in the furrows of the fields.
and Jacob fled into the country of Syria and Israel served
for a wife and for a wife he kept sheep.
and by a prophet the lord brought Israel out of Egypt and by
a prophet was he preserved.
Ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly therefore shall
he leave his blood upon him and his reproach shall his lord
return unto him.
when Ephraim spake trembling he exalted himself in Israel
but when he offended in Baal he died.
and now they Sin more and more and have made them molten
images of their Silver and idols according to their own
understanding all of it the work of the craftsmen they say
of them let the men that sacrifice Kiss the calves.
therefore they shall be as the morning cloud and as the early
dew that passeth away as the chaff that is driven with the
whirlwind out of the floor and as the smoke out of the
chimney.
yet I Am the lord thy God from the land of Egypt and thou
shalt know no God but me for there is no saviour beside me.
I did know thee in the wilderness in the land of great
drought.
according to their pasture so were they filled they were
filled and their heart was exalted therefore have they
forgotten me.
therefore I will be unto them as a lion as a leopard by the
way will I observe them
I will meet them as a bear that is bereaved of her whelps and
will rend the caul of their heart and there will I devour
them like a lion the wild beast shall tear them.
O Israel thou hast destroyed thyself but in me is thine
help.
I will be thy king where is any other that may save thee in
all thy cities? and thy judges of whom thou saidst give me a
king and princes?
I gave thee a king in mine anger and took him away in my
wrath.
the iniquity of Ephraim is bound up his Sin is hid.
the sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him he is
an unwise son for he should not stay long in the place of the
breaking forth of children.
I will ransom them from the power of the grave I will redeem
them from death O death I will be thy plagues O grave I
will be thy destruction repentance shall be hid from mine
eyes.
though he be fruitful among his brethren an east wind shall
come the wind of the lord shall come up from the wilderness
and his spring shall become dry and his fountain shall be
dried up he shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant vessels.
Samaria shall become desolate for she hath rebelled against
her God they shall fall by the sword their infants shall be
dashed in pieces and their women with child shall be ripped
up.
O Israel return unto the lord thy God for thou hast fallen
by thine iniquity.
take with you words and turn to the lord say unto him take
away all iniquity and receive us graciously so will we
render the calves of our lips.
Asshur shall not save us we will not ride upon horses
Neither will we say any more to the work of our hands ye are
our gods for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy.
I will heal their backsliding I will love them freely for
mine anger is turned away from him.
I will be as the dew unto Israel he shall grow as the lily
and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.
his branches shall spread and his beauty shall be as the
olive tree and his smell as Lebanon.
they that dwell under his shadow shall return they shall
revive as the corn and grow as the vine the scent thereof
shall be as the wine of Lebanon.
Ephraim shall say what have I to do any more with idols? I
have heard him and observed him I Am like a green fir tree.
from me is thy fruit found.
who is wise and he shall understand these things? prudent
and he shall know them? for the ways of the lord are right
and the just shall walk in them but the transgressors shall
fall therein.
the word of the lord that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.
hear this ye old men and give ear all ye inhabitants of the
land. hath this been in your days or even in the days of your
fathers?
tell ye your children of it and let your children tell their
children and their children another generation.
that which the palmerworm hath left hath the locust eaten and
that which the locust hath left hath the cankerworm eaten and
that which the cankerworm hath left hath the caterpiller
eaten.
awake ye drunkards and weep and howl all ye drinkers of
wine because of the new wine for it is cut off from your
mouth.
for a nation is come up upon my land strong and without
number whose teeth are the teeth of a lion and he hath the
cheek teeth of a great lion.
he hath laid my vine waste and barked my fig tree he hath
made it clean bare and cast it away the branches thereof are
made white.
lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of
her youth.
the meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from the
house of the lord the priests the lord s ministers mourn.
the field is wasted the land mourneth for the corn is
wasted the new wine is dried up the oil languisheth.
be ye ashamed O ye husbandmen howl O ye vinedressers for
the wheat and for the barley because the harvest of the field
is perished.
the vine is dried up and the fig tree languisheth the
pomegranate tree the palm tree also and the apple tree even
all the trees of the field are withered because joy is
withered away from the sons of men.
gird yourselves and lament ye priests howl ye ministers of
the altar come lie all night in sackcloth ye ministers of
my God for the meat offering and the drink offering is
withholden from the house of your God.
sanctify ye a fast call a solemn assembly gather the elders
and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the lord
your God and cry unto the lord
alas for the day for the day of the lord is at hand and as a
destruction from the almighty shall it come.
is not the meat cut off before our eyes yea joy and gladness
from the house of our God?
the seed is rotten under their clods the garners are laid
desolate the barns are broken down for the corn is withered.
how do the beasts groan the herds of cattle are perplexed
because they have no pasture yea the flocks of sheep are
made desolate.
O lord to thee will I cry for the fire hath devoured the
pastures of the wilderness and the flame hath burned all the
trees of the field.
the beasts of the field cry also unto thee for the rivers of
waters are dried up and the fire hath devoured the pastures
of the wilderness.
blow ye the trumpet in Zion and sound an alarm in my holy
mountain let all the inhabitants of the land tremble for the
day of the lord cometh for it is nigh at hand
a day of darkness and of gloominess a day of clouds and of
thick darkness as the morning spread upon the mountains a
great people and a strong there hath not been ever the like
Neither shall be any more after it even to the years of many
generations.
a fire devoureth before them and behind them a flame burneth
the land is as the garden of Eden before them and behind them
a desolate wilderness yea and nothing shall escape them.
the appearance of them is as the appearance of horses and as
horsemen so shall they run.
like the noise of chariots on the tops of mountains shall they
leap like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the
stubble as a strong people set in battle array.
before their face the people shall be Much pained all faces
shall gather blackness.
they shall run like Mighty men they shall climb the wall like
men of war and they shall march every one on his ways and
they shall not break their ranks
Neither shall one thrust another they shall walk every one in
his path and when they fall upon the sword they shall not be
wounded.
they shall run to and fro in the city they shall run upon the
wall they shall climb up upon the houses they shall enter in
at the windows like a thief.
the earth shall quake before them the heavens shall tremble
the sun and the moon shall be dark and the stars shall
withdraw their shining
and the lord shall utter his voice before his army for his
camp is very great for he is strong that executeth his word
for the day of the lord is great and very terrible and who
can abide it?
therefore also now saith the lord turn ye even to me with
all your heart and with fasting and with weeping and with
mourning
and rend your heart and not your garments and turn unto the
lord your God for he is gracious and merciful slow to anger
and of great kindness and repenteth him of the evil.
who knoweth if he will return and repent and leave a blessing
behind him even a meat offering and a drink offering unto the
lord your God?
blow the trumpet in Zion sanctify a fast call a solemn
assembly
gather the people sanctify the congregation assemble the
elders gather the children and those that suck the breasts
let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber and the bride out
of her closet.
let the priests the ministers of the lord weep between the
porch and the altar and let them say spare thy people O
lord and give not thine heritage to reproach that the
heathen should rule over them wherefore should they say among
the people where is their God?
then will the lord be jealous for his land and pity his
people.
yea the lord will answer and say unto his people behold I
will send you corn and wine and oil and ye shall be
satisfied therewith and I will no more make you a reproach
among the heathen
but I will remove far off from you the northern army and will
drive him into a land barren and desolate with his face
toward the east sea and his hinder part toward the utmost
sea and his stink shall come up and his ill savour shall
come up because he hath done great things.
fear not O land be glad and rejoice for the lord will do
great things.
be not afraid ye beasts of the field for the pastures of the
wilderness do spring for the tree beareth her fruit the fig
tree and the vine do yield their strength.
be glad then ye children of Zion and rejoice in the lord
your God for he hath given you the former rain moderately
and he will cause to come down for you the rain the former
rain and the latter rain in the first month.
and the floors shall be full of wheat and the vats shall
overflow with wine and oil.
and I will restore to you the years that the locust hath
eaten the cankerworm and the caterpiller and the
palmerworm my great army which I sent among you.
and ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied and praise the
name of the lord your God that hath dealt wondrously with
you and my people shall never be ashamed.
and ye shall know that I Am in the midst of Israel and that I
Am the lord your God and none else and my people shall never
be ashamed.
and it shall come to pass afterward that I will pour out my
spirit upon all flesh and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy your old men shall dream dreams your young men
shall see visions
and also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those
days will I pour out my spirit.
and I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth
blood and fire and pillars of smoke.
the sun shall be turned into darkness and the moon into
blood before the great and terrible day of the lord come.
and it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the
name of the lord shall be delivered for in mount Zion and in
Jerusalem shall be deliverance as the lord hath said and in
the remnant whom the lord shall call.
for behold in those days and in that time when I shall
bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem
I will also gather all nations and will bring them down into
the valley of Jehoshaphat and will plead with them there for
my people and for my heritage Israel whom they have scattered
among the nations and parted my land.
and they have cast lots for my people and have given a boy
for an harlot and sold a girl for wine that they might
drink.
yea and what have ye to do with me O Tyre and Zidon and
all the coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a recompence?
and if ye recompense me swiftly and speedily will I return
your recompence upon your own head
because ye have taken my Silver and my gold and have carried
into your temples my goodly pleasant things
the children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have
ye sold unto the Grecians that ye might remove them far from
their border.
behold I will raise them out of the place whither ye have
sold them and will return your recompence upon your own head
and I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of
the children of Judah and they shall sell them to the
Sabeans to a people far off for the lord hath spoken it.
proclaim ye this among the Gentiles prepare war wake up the
Mighty men let all the men of war draw near let them come
up
beat your plowshares into swords and your pruninghooks into
spears let the weak say I Am strong.
assemble yourselves and come all ye heathen and gather
yourselves together round about thither cause thy Mighty ones
to come down O lord.
let the heathen be wakened and come up to the valley of
Jehoshaphat for there will I sit to judge all the heathen
round about.
put ye in the sickle for the harvest is ripe come get you
down for the press is full the fats overflow for their
wickedness is great.
multitudes multitudes in the valley of decision for the day
of the lord is near in the valley of decision.
the sun and the moon shall be darkened and the stars shall
withdraw their shining.
the lord also shall roar out of Zion and utter his voice from
Jerusalem and the heavens and the earth shall shake but the
lord will be the hope of his people and the strength of the
children of Israel.
so shall ye know that I Am the lord your God dwelling in Zion
my holy mountain then shall Jerusalem be holy and there
shall no strangers pass through her any more.
and it shall come to pass in that day that the mountains
shall drop down new wine and the hills shall flow with milk
and all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters and a
fountain shall come forth out of the house of the lord and
shall water the valley of Shittim.
Egypt shall be a desolation and Edom shall be a desolate
wilderness for the violence against the children of Judah
because they have shed innocent blood in their land.
but Judah shall dwell for ever and Jerusalem from generation
to generation.
for I will cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed for
the lord dwelleth in Zion.
the words of Amos who was among the herdmen of Tekoa which
he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah
and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel
two years before the earthquake.
and he said the lord will roar from Zion and utter his voice
from Jerusalem and the habitations of the shepherds shall
mourn and the top of Carmel shall wither.
thus saith the lord for three transgressions of Damascus and
for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof because
they have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of Iron
but I will send a fire into the house of Hazael which shall
devour the palaces of Benhadad.
I will break also the bar of Damascus and cut off the
inhabitant from the plain of Aven and him that holdeth the
sceptre from the house of Eden and the people of Syria shall
go into captivity unto Kir saith the lord.
thus saith the lord for three transgressions of Gaza and for
four I will not turn away the punishment thereof because
they carried away captive the whole captivity to deliver them
up to Edom
but I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza which shall devour
the palaces thereof
and I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod and him that
holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon and I will turn mine hand
against Ekron and the remnant of the Philistines shall
perish saith the lord God.
thus saith the lord for three transgressions of Tyrus and
for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof because
they delivered up the whole captivity to Edom and remembered
not the brotherly covenant
but I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus which shall
devour the palaces thereof.
thus saith the lord for three transgressions of Edom and for
four I will not turn away the punishment thereof because he
did pursue his brother with the sword and did cast off all
pity and his anger did tear perpetually and he kept his
wrath for ever
but I will send a fire upon Teman which shall devour the
palaces of Bozrah.
thus saith the lord for three transgressions of the children
of Ammon and for four I will not turn away the punishment
thereof because they have ripped up the women with child of
Gilead that they might enlarge their border
but I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah and it shall
devour the palaces thereof with shouting in the day of
battle with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind
and their king shall go into captivity he and his princes
together saith the lord.
thus saith the lord for three transgressions of Moab and for
four I will not turn away the punishment thereof because he
burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime
but I will send a fire upon Moab and it shall devour the
palaces of Kirioth and Moab shall die with tumult with
shouting and with the sound of the trumpet
and I will cut off the judge from the midst thereof and will
slay all the princes thereof with him saith the lord.
thus saith the lord for three transgressions of Judah and
for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof because
they have despised the law of the lord and have not kept his
commandments and their lies caused them to err after the
which their fathers have walked
but I will send a fire upon Judah and it shall devour the
palaces of Jerusalem.
thus saith the lord for three transgressions of Israel and
for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof because
they sold the righteous for Silver and the poor for a pair of
shoes
that pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor
and turn aside the way of the meek and a man and his father
will go in unto the same maid to profane my holy name
and they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by
every altar and they drink the wine of the condemned in the
house of their God.
yet destroyed I the Amorite before them whose height was like
the height of the cedars and he was strong as the oaks yet I
destroyed his fruit from above and his roots from beneath.
also I brought you up from the land of Egypt and led you
forty years through the wilderness to possess the land of the
Amorite.
and I raised up of your sons for prophets and of your young
men for Nazarites. is it not even thus O ye children of
Israel? saith the lord.
but ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink and commanded the
prophets saying prophesy not.
behold I Am pressed under you as a cart is pressed that is
full of sheaves.
therefore the flight shall perish from the swift and the
strong shall not strengthen his force Neither shall the
Mighty deliver himself
Neither shall he stand that handleth the bow and he that is
swift of foot shall not deliver himself Neither shall he that
rideth the horse deliver himself.
and he that is courageous among the Mighty shall flee away
naked in that day saith the lord.
hear this word that the lord hath spoken against you O
children of Israel against the whole family which I brought
up from the land of Egypt saying
you only have I known of all the families of the earth
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.
can two walk together except they be agreed?
will a lion roar in the forest when he hath no prey? will a
young lion cry out of his den if he have taken nothing?
can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth where no gin is for
him? shall one take up a snare from the earth and have taken
nothing at all?
shall a trumpet be blown in the city and the people not be
afraid? shall there be evil in a city and the lord hath not
done it?
surely the lord God will do nothing but he revealeth his
secret unto his servants the prophets.
the lion hath roared who will not fear? the lord God hath
spoken who can but prophesy?
publish in the palaces at Ashdod and in the palaces in the
land of Egypt and say assemble yourselves upon the mountains
of Samaria and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof
and the oppressed in the midst thereof.
for they know not to do right saith the lord who store up
violence and robbery in their palaces.
therefore thus saith the lord God an adversary there shall be
even round about the land and he shall bring down thy
strength from thee and thy palaces shall be spoiled.
thus saith the lord as the Shepherd taketh out of the mouth
of the lion two legs or a piece of an ear so shall the
children of Israel be taken out that dwell in Samaria in the
corner of a bed and in Damascus in a couch.
hear ye and testify in the house of Jacob saith the lord
God the God of hosts
that in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of
Israel upon him I will also visit the altars of Bethel and
the horns of the altar shall be cut off and fall to the
ground.
and I will smite the winter house with the summer house and
the houses of ivory shall perish and the great houses shall
have an end saith the lord.
hear this word ye kine of Bashan that are in the mountain of
Samaria which oppress the poor which crush the needy which
say to their masters bring and let us drink.
the lord God hath sworn by his holiness that lo the days
shall come upon you that he will take you away with hooks
and your posterity with fishhooks.
and ye shall go out at the breaches every cow at that which
is before her and ye shall cast them into the palace saith
the lord.
come to Bethel and transgress at Gilgal multiply
transgression and bring your sacrifices every morning and
your tithes after three years
and offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven and
proclaim and publish the free offerings for this liketh you
O ye children of Israel saith the lord God.
and I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your
cities and want of bread in all your places yet have ye not
returned unto me saith the lord.
and also I have withholden the rain from you when there were
yet three months to the harvest and I caused it to rain upon
one city and caused it not to rain upon another city one
piece was rained upon and the piece whereupon it rained not
withered.
so two or three cities wandered unto one city to drink water
but they were not satisfied yet have ye not returned unto me
saith the lord.
I have smitten you with blasting and mildew when your gardens
and your vineyards and your fig trees and your olive trees
increased the palmerworm devoured them yet have ye not
returned unto me saith the lord.
I have sent among you the pestilence after the manner of
Egypt your young men have I slain with the sword and have
taken away your horses and I have made the stink of your
camps to come up unto your nostrils yet have ye not returned
unto me saith the lord.
I have overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the
burning yet have ye not returned unto me saith the lord.
therefore thus will I do unto thee O Israel and because I
will do this unto thee prepare to meet thy God O Israel.
for lo he that formeth the mountains and createth the wind
and declareth unto man what is his thought that maketh the
morning darkness and treadeth upon the high places of the
earth the lord the God of hosts is his name.
hear ye this word which I take up against you even a
lamentation O house of Israel.
the virgin of Israel is fallen she shall no more rise she is
forsaken upon her land there is none to raise her up.
for thus saith the lord God the city that went out by a
thousand shall leave an hundred and that which went forth by
an hundred shall leave Ten to the house of Israel.
for thus saith the lord unto the house of Israel seek ye me
and ye shall live
but seek not Bethel nor enter into Gilgal and pass not to
Beersheba for Gilgal shall surely go into captivity and
Bethel shall come to nought.
seek the lord and ye shall live lest he break out like fire
in the house of Joseph and devour it and there be none to
quench it in Bethel.
ye who turn judgment to wormwood and leave off righteousness
in the earth
seek him that maketh the seven stars and Orion and turneth
the shadow of death into the morning and maketh the day dark
with night that calleth for the waters of the sea and
poureth them out upon the face of the earth the lord is his
name
that strengtheneth the spoiled against the strong so that the
spoiled shall come against the fortress.
they hate him that rebuketh in the gate and they abhor him
that speaketh uprightly.
forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor and ye
take from him burdens of wheat ye have built houses of hewn
stone but ye shall not dwell in them ye have planted
pleasant vineyards but ye shall not drink wine of them.
for I know your manifold transgressions and your Mighty sins
they afflict the just they take a bribe and they turn aside
the poor in the gate from their right.
therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time for it
is an evil time.
seek good and not evil that ye may live and so the lord
the God of hosts shall be with you as ye have spoken.
hate the evil and love the good and establish judgment in
the gate it may be that the lord God of hosts will be
gracious unto the remnant of Joseph.
therefore the lord the God of hosts the lord saith thus
wailing shall be in all streets and they shall say in all the
highways alas alas and they shall call the husbandman to
mourning and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing.
and in all vineyards shall be wailing for I will pass through
thee saith the lord.
woe unto you that desire the day of the lord to what end is
it for you? the day of the lord is darkness and not light.
as if a man did flee from a lion and a bear met him or went
into the house and leaned his hand on the wall and a serpent
bit him.
shall not the day of the lord be darkness and not light? even
very dark and no brightness in it?
I hate I despise your feast days and I will not smell in
your solemn assemblies.
though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings I
will not accept them Neither will I regard the peace
offerings of your fat beasts.
take thou away from me the noise of thy songs for I will not
hear the melody of thy viols.
but let judgment run down as waters and righteousness as a
Mighty stream.
have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the
wilderness forty years O house of Israel?
but ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your
images the star of your God which ye made to yourselves.
therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond
Damascus saith the lord whose name is the God of hosts.
woe to them that are at ease in Zion and trust in the
mountain of Samaria which are named chief of the nations to
whom the house of Israel came
pass ye unto Calneh and see and from thence go ye to Hamath
the great then go down to Gath of the Philistines be they
better than these kingdoms? or their border greater than your
border?
ye that put far away the evil day and cause the seat of
violence to come near
that lie upon beds of ivory and stretch themselves upon their
couches and eat the lambs out of the flock and the calves
out of the midst of the stall
that chant to the sound of the viol and invent to themselves
instruments of musick like David
that drink wine in bowls and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments but they are not grieved for the affliction of
Joseph.
therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go
captive and the banquet of them that stretched themselves
shall be removed.
the lord God hath sworn by himself saith the lord the God of
hosts I abhor the excellency of Jacob and hate his palaces
therefore will I deliver up the city with all that is therein.
and it shall come to pass if there remain Ten men in one
house that they shall die.
and a man s uncle shall take him up and he that burneth him
to bring out the bones out of the house and shall say unto
him that is by the sides of the house is there yet any with
thee? and he shall say no. then shall he say hold thy
tongue for we may not make mention of the name of the lord.
for behold the lord commandeth and he will smite the great
house with breaches and the little house with clefts.
shall horses run upon the rock? will one plow there with oxen?
for ye have turned judgment into gall and the fruit of
righteousness into hemlock
ye which rejoice in a thing of nought which say have we not
taken to us horns by our own strength?
but behold I will raise up against you a nation O house of
Israel saith the lord the God of hosts and they shall
afflict you from the entering in of Hemath unto the river of
the wilderness.
thus hath the lord God shewed unto me and behold he formed
grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter
growth and lo it was the latter growth after the king s
mowings.
and it came to pass that when they had made an end of eating
the grass of the land then I said O lord God forgive I
beseech thee by whom shall Jacob Arise? for he is small.
the lord repented for this it shall not be saith the lord.
thus hath the lord God shewed unto me and behold the lord
God called to contend by fire and it devoured the great deep
and did eat up a part.
then said I O lord God cease I beseech thee by whom shall
Jacob Arise? for he is small.
the lord repented for this this also shall not be saith the
lord God.
thus he shewed me and behold the lord stood upon a wall
made by a plumbline with a plumbline in his hand.
and the lord said unto me Amos what seest thou? and I said
a plumbline. then said the lord behold I will set a
plumbline in the midst of my people Israel I will not again
pass by them any more
and the high places of Isaac shall be desolate and the
sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste and I will rise
against the house of Jeroboam with the sword.
then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of
Israel saying Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst
of the house of Israel the land is not able to bear all his
words.
for thus Amos saith Jeroboam shall die by the sword and
Israel shall surely be led away captive out of their own land.
also Amaziah said unto Amos O thou seer go flee thee away
into the land of Judah and there eat bread and prophesy
there
but prophesy not again any more at Bethel for it is the
king s chapel and it is the king s court.
then answered Amos and said to Amaziah I was no prophet
Neither was I a prophet s son but I was an herdman and a
gatherer of sycomore fruit
and the lord took me as I followed the flock and the lord
said unto me go prophesy unto my people Israel.
now therefore hear thou the word of the lord thou sayest
prophesy not against Israel and drop not thy word against the
house of Isaac.
therefore thus saith the lord thy wife shall be an harlot in
the city and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the
sword and thy land shall be divided by line and thou shalt
die in a polluted land and Israel shall surely go into
captivity forth of his land.
thus hath the lord God shewed unto me and behold a basket of
summer fruit.
and he said Amos what seest thou? and I said a basket of
summer fruit. then said the lord unto me the end is come upon
my people of Israel I will not again pass by them any more.
and the songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day
saith the lord God there shall be many dead bodies in every
place they shall cast them forth with silence.
hear this O ye that swallow up the needy even to make the
poor of the land to fail
saying when will the new moon be gone that we may sell corn?
and the sabbath that we may set forth wheat making the Ephah
small and the shekel great and falsifying the balances by
deceit?
that we may buy the poor for Silver and the needy for a pair
of shoes yea and sell the refuse of the wheat?
the lord hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob surely I will
never forget any of their works.
shall not the land tremble for this and every one mourn that
dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood and
it shall be cast out and drowned as by the flood of Egypt.
and it shall come to pass in that day saith the lord God
that I will cause the sun to go down at noon and I will
darken the earth in the clear day
and I will turn your feasts into mourning and all your songs
into lamentation and I will bring up sackcloth upon all
loins and baldness upon every head and I will make it as the
mourning of an only son and the end thereof as a bitter day.
behold the days come saith the lord God that I will send a
famine in the land not a famine of bread nor a thirst for
water but of hearing the words of the lord
and they shall wander from sea to sea and from the north even
to the east they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the
lord and shall not find it.
in that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for
thirst.
they that swear by the Sin of Samaria and say thy God O
Dan liveth and the manner of Beersheba liveth even they
shall fall and never rise up again.
I saw the lord standing upon the altar and he said smite the
lintel of the door that the posts may shake and cut them in
the head all of them and I will slay the last of them with
the sword he that fleeth of them shall not flee away and he
that escapeth of them shall not be delivered.
though they dig into hell thence shall mine hand take them
though they climb up to heaven thence will I bring them down
and though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel I will
search and take them out thence and though they be hid from
my sight in the bottom of the sea thence will I command the
serpent and he shall bite them
and though they go into captivity before their enemies thence
will I command the sword and it shall slay them and I will
set mine eyes upon them for evil and not for good.
and the lord God of hosts is he that toucheth the land and it
shall melt and all that dwell therein shall mourn and it
shall rise up wholly like a flood and shall be drowned as by
the flood of Egypt.
it is he that buildeth his stories in the heaven and hath
founded his troop in the earth he that calleth for the waters
of the sea and poureth them out upon the face of the earth
the lord is his name.
are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me O children
of Israel? saith the lord. have not I brought up Israel out of
the land of Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor and the
Syrians from Kir?
behold the eyes of the lord God are upon the sinful kingdom
and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth saving
that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob saith the
lord.
for lo I will command and I will sift the house of Israel
among all nations like as corn is sifted in a sieve yet
shall not the least grain fall upon the earth.
all the sinners of my people shall die by the sword which
say the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.
in that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is
fallen and close up the breaches thereof and I will raise up
his ruins and I will build it as in the days of old
that they may possess the remnant of Edom and of all the
heathen which are called by my name saith the lord that
doeth this.
behold the days come saith the lord that the plowman shall
overtake the reaper and the treader of grapes him that soweth
seed and the mountains shall drop sweet wine and all the
hills shall melt.
and I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel
and they shall build the waste cities and inhabit them and
they shall plant vineyards and drink the wine thereof they
shall also make gardens and eat the fruit of them.
and I will plant them upon their land and they shall no more
be pulled up out of their land which I have given them saith
the lord thy God.
the vision of Obadiah. thus saith the lord God concerning
Edom we have heard a rumour from the lord and an ambassador
is sent among the heathen Arise ye and let us rise up
against her in battle.
behold I have made thee small among the heathen thou art
greatly despised.
the pride of thine heart hath deceived thee thou that
dwellest in the clefts of the rock whose habitation is high
that saith in his heart who shall bring me down to the
ground?
though thou exalt thyself as the eagle and though thou set
thy nest among the stars thence will I bring thee down saith
the lord.
if thieves came to thee if robbers by night how art thou
cut off would they not have stolen till they had enough? if
the grapegatherers came to thee would they not leave some
grapes?
how are the things of Esau searched out how are his hidden
things sought up
all the men of thy confederacy have brought thee even to the
border the men that were at peace with thee have deceived
thee and prevailed against thee that they eat thy bread have
laid a wound under thee there is none understanding in him.
shall I not in that day saith the lord even destroy the wise
men out of Edom and understanding out of the mount of Esau?
and thy Mighty men O Teman shall be dismayed to the end
that every one of the mount of Esau may be cut off by
slaughter.
for thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover
thee and thou shalt be cut off for ever.
in the day that thou stoodest on the other side in the day
that the strangers carried away captive his forces and
foreigners entered into his gates and cast lots upon
Jerusalem even thou wast as one of them.
but thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother
in the day that he became a stranger Neither shouldest thou
have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their
destruction Neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the
day of distress.
thou shouldest not have entered into the gate of my people in
the day of their calamity yea thou shouldest not have looked
on their affliction in the day of their calamity nor have
laid hands on their substance in the day of their calamity
Neither shouldest thou have stood in the crossway to cut off
those of his that did escape Neither shouldest thou have
delivered up those of his that did remain in the day of
distress.
for the day of the lord is near upon all the heathen as thou
hast done it shall be done unto thee thy reward shall return
upon thine own head.
for as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain so shall all the
heathen drink continually yea they shall drink and they
shall swallow down and they shall be as though they had not
been.
but upon mount Zion shall be deliverance and there shall be
holiness and the house of Jacob shall possess their
possessions.
and the house of Jacob shall be a fire and the house of
Joseph a flame and the house of Esau for stubble and they
shall kindle in them and devour them and there shall not be
any remaining of the house of Esau for the lord hath spoken
it.
and they of the south shall possess the mount of Esau and
they of the plain the Philistines and they shall possess the
fields of Ephraim and the fields of Samaria and Benjamin
shall possess Gilead.
and the captivity of this host of the children of Israel shall
possess that of the Canaanites even unto Zarephath and the
captivity of Jerusalem which is in Sepharad shall possess
the cities of the south.
and saviours shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of
Esau and the kingdom shall be the lord s.
now the word of the lord came unto Jonah the son of Amittai
saying
Arise go to Nineveh that great city and cry against it for
their wickedness is come up before me.
but Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of
the lord and went down to Joppa and he found a ship going to
Tarshish so he paid the fare thereof and went down into it
to go with them unto Tarshish from the presence of the lord.
but the lord sent out a great wind into the sea and there was
a Mighty tempest in the sea so that the ship was like to be
broken.
then the mariners were afraid and cried every man unto his
God and cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the
sea to lighten it of them. but Jonah was gone down into the
sides of the ship and he lay and was fast asleep.
so the shipmaster came to him and said unto him what meanest
thou O sleeper? Arise call upon thy God if so be that God
will think upon us that we perish not.
and they said every one to his fellow come and let us cast
lots that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us.
so they cast lots and the Lot fell upon Jonah.
then said they unto him tell us we pray thee for whose
cause this evil is upon us what is thine occupation? and
whence comest thou? what is thy country? and of what people
art thou?
and he said unto them I Am an Hebrew and I fear the lord
the God of heaven which hath made the sea and the dry land.
then were the men exceedingly afraid and said unto him. why
hast thou done this? for the men knew that he fled from the
presence of the lord because he had told them.
then said they unto him what shall we do unto thee that the
sea may be calm unto us? for the sea wrought and was
tempestuous.
and he said unto them take me up and cast me forth into the
sea so shall the sea be calm unto you for I know that for my
sake this great tempest is upon you.
nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring it to the land but
they could not for the sea wrought and was tempestuous
against them.
wherefore they cried unto the lord and said we beseech thee
O lord we beseech thee let us not perish for this man s
life and lay not upon us innocent blood for thou O lord
hast done as it pleased thee.
so they look up Jonah and cast him forth into the sea and
the sea ceased from her raging.
then the men feared the lord exceedingly and offered a
sacrifice unto the lord and made vows.
now the lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.
and Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three
nights.
then Jonah prayed unto the lord his God out of the fish s
belly
and said I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the lord
and he heard me out of the belly of hell cried I and thou
heardest my voice.
for thou hadst cast me into the deep in the midst of the
seas and the floods compassed me about all thy billows and
thy waves passed over me.
then I said I Am cast out of thy sight yet I will look again
toward thy holy temple.
the waters compassed me about even to the soul the depth
closed me round about the weeds were wrapped about my head.
I went down to the bottoms of the mountains the earth with
her bars was about me for ever yet hast thou brought up my
life from corruption O lord my God.
when my soul fainted within me I remembered the lord and my
prayer came in unto thee into thine holy temple.
they that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy.
but I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving
I will pay that that I have vowed. salvation is of the lord.
and the lord spake unto the fish and it vomited out Jonah
upon the dry land.
and the word of the lord came unto Jonah the second time
saying
Arise go unto Nineveh that great city and preach unto it
the preaching that I bid thee.
so Jonah arose and went unto Nineveh according to the word
of the lord. now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three
days journey.
and Jonah began to enter into the city a day s journey and he
cried and said yet forty days and Nineveh shall be
overthrown.
so the people of Nineveh believed God and proclaimed a fast
and put on sackcloth from the greatest of them even to the
least of them.
for word came unto the king of Nineveh and he arose from his
throne and he laid his robe from him and covered him with
sackcloth and sat in ashes.
and he caused it to be proclaimed and published through
Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles saying let
Neither man nor beast herd nor flock taste any thing let
them not feed nor drink water
but let man and beast be covered with sackcloth and cry
mightily unto God yea let them turn every one from his evil
way and from the violence that is in their hands.
who can tell if God will turn and repent and turn away from
his fierce anger that we perish not?
and God saw their works that they turned from their evil way
and God repented of the evil that he had said that he would
do unto them and he did it not.
but it displeased Jonah exceedingly and he was very angry.
and he prayed unto the lord and said I pray thee O lord
was not this my saying when I was yet in my country?
therefore I fled before unto Tarshish for I knew that thou
art a gracious God and merciful slow to anger and of great
kindness and repentest thee of the evil.
therefore now O lord take I beseech thee my life from me
for it is better for me to die than to live.
then said the lord doest thou well to be angry?
so Jonah went out of the city and sat on the east side of the
city and there made him a booth and sat under it in the
shadow till he might see what would become of the city.
and the lord God prepared a gourd and made it to come up over
Jonah that it might be a shadow over his head to deliver him
from his grief. so Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd.
but God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day
and it smote the gourd that it withered.
and it came to pass when the sun did Arise that God prepared
a vehement east wind and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah
that he fainted and wished in himself to die and said it is
better for me to die than to live.
and God said to Jonah doest thou well to be angry for the
gourd? and he said I do well to be angry even unto death.
then said the lord thou hast had pity on the gourd for the
which thou hast not laboured Neither madest it grow which
came up in a night and perished in a night
and should not I spare Nineveh that great city wherein are
more then sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern
between their right hand and their left hand and also Much
cattle?
the word of the lord that came to Micah the Morasthite in the
days of Jotham Ahaz and Hezekiah kings of Judah which he
saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.
hear all ye people hearken O earth and all that therein
is and let the lord God be witness against you the lord from
his holy temple.
for behold the lord cometh forth out of his place and will
come down and tread upon the high places of the earth.
and the mountains shall be molten under him and the valleys
shall be cleft as wax before the fire and as the waters that
are poured down a steep place.
for the transgression of Jacob is all this and for the sins
of the house of Israel. what is the transgression of Jacob? is
it not Samaria? and what are the high places of Judah? are
they not Jerusalem?
therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field and as
plantings of a vineyard and I will pour down the stones
thereof into the valley and I will discover the foundations
thereof.
and all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to pieces
and all the hires thereof shall be burned with the fire and
all the idols thereof will I lay desolate for she gathered it
of the hire of an harlot and they shall return to the hire of
an harlot.
therefore I will wail and howl I will go stripped and naked
I will make a wailing like the dragons and mourning as the
owls.
for her wound is incurable for it is come unto Judah he is
come unto the gate of my people even to Jerusalem.
declare ye it not at Gath weep ye not at all in the house of
Aphrah roll thyself in the dust.
pass ye away thou inhabitant of Saphir having thy shame
naked the inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning
of Bethezel he shall receive of you his standing.
for the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully for good but
evil came down from the lord unto the gate of Jerusalem.
O thou inhabitant of Lachish bind the chariot to the swift
beast she is the beginning of the Sin to the daughter of
Zion for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.
therefore shalt thou give presents to Moreshethgath the
houses of Achzib shall be a lie to the kings of Israel.
yet will I bring an heir unto thee O inhabitant of Mareshah
he shall come unto Adullam the glory of Israel.
make thee bald and poll thee for thy delicate children
enlarge thy baldness as the eagle for they are gone into
captivity from thee.
woe to them that devise iniquity and work evil upon their
beds when the morning is light they practise it because it
is in the power of their hand.
and they covet fields and take them by violence and houses
and take them away so they oppress a man and his house even
a man and his heritage.
therefore thus saith the lord behold against this family do
I devise an evil from which ye shall not remove your necks
Neither shall ye go haughtily for this time is evil.
in that day shall one take up a parable against you and
lament with a doleful lamentation and say we be utterly
spoiled he hath changed the portion of my people how hath he
removed it from me turning away he hath divided our fields.
therefore thou shalt have none that shall cast a cord by Lot
in the congregation of the lord.
prophesy ye not say they to them that prophesy they shall
not prophesy to them that they shall not take shame.
O thou that art named the house of Jacob is the spirit of the
lord straitened? are these his doings? do not my words do good
to him that walketh uprightly?
even of late my people is risen up as an enemy ye pull off
the robe with the garment from them that pass by securely as
men averse from war.
the women of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant
houses from their children have ye taken away my glory for
ever.
Arise ye and depart for this is not your rest because it is
polluted it shall destroy you even with a sore destruction.
if a man walking in the spirit and falsehood do lie saying I
will prophesy unto thee of wine and of strong drink he shall
even be the prophet of this people.
I will surely assemble O Jacob all of thee I will surely
gather the remnant of Israel I will put them together as the
sheep of Bozrah as the flock in the midst of their fold they
shall make great noise by reason of the multitude of men.
the breaker is come up before them they have broken up and
have passed through the gate and are gone out by it and
their king shall pass before them and the lord on the head of
them.
and I said hear I pray you O heads of Jacob and ye princes
of the house of Israel is it not for you to know judgment?
who hate the good and love the evil who pluck off their skin
from off them and their flesh from off their bones
who also eat the flesh of my people and flay their skin from
off them and they break their bones and chop them in pieces
as for the pot and as flesh within the caldron.
then shall they cry unto the lord but he will not hear them
he will even hide his face from them at that time as they
have behaved themselves ill in their doings.
thus saith the lord concerning the prophets that make my
people err that bite with their teeth and cry peace and he
that putteth not into their mouths they even prepare war
against him.
therefore night shall be unto you that ye shall not have a
vision and it shall be dark unto you that ye shall not
divine and the sun shall go down over the prophets and the
day shall be dark over them.
then shall the seers be ashamed and the diviners confounded
yea they shall all cover their lips for there is no answer
of God.
but truly I Am full of power by the spirit of the lord and of
judgment and of might to declare unto Jacob his
transgression and to Israel his Sin.
hear this I pray you ye heads of the house of Jacob and
princes of the house of Israel that abhor judgment and
pervert all equity.
they build up Zion with blood and Jerusalem with iniquity.
the heads thereof judge for reward and the priests thereof
teach for hire and the prophets thereof divine for money yet
will they lean upon the lord and say is not the lord among
us? none evil can come upon us.
therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field and
Jerusalem shall become heaps and the mountain of the house as
the high places of the forest.
but in the last days it shall come to pass that the mountain
of the house of the lord shall be established in the top of
the mountains and it shall be exalted above the hills and
people shall flow unto it.
and many nations shall come and say come and let us go up
to the mountain of the lord and to the house of the God of
Jacob and he will teach us of his ways and we will walk in
his paths for the law shall go forth of Zion and the word of
the lord from Jerusalem.
and he shall judge among many people and rebuke strong
nations afar off and they shall beat their swords into
plowshares and their spears into pruninghooks nation shall
not lift up a sword against nation Neither shall they learn
war any more.
but they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig
tree and none shall make them afraid for the mouth of the
lord of hosts hath spoken it.
for all people will walk every one in the name of his God and
we will walk in the name of the lord our God for ever and
ever.
in that day saith the lord will I assemble her that halteth
and I will gather her that is driven out and her that I have
afflicted
and I will make her that halted a remnant and her that was
cast far off a strong nation and the lord shall reign over
them in mount Zion from henceforth even for ever.
and thou O tower of the flock the strong hold of the
daughter of Zion unto thee shall it come even the first
dominion the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.
now why dost thou cry out aloud? is there no king in thee? is
thy counsellor perished? for pangs have taken thee as a woman
in travail.
be in pain and labour to bring forth O daughter of Zion
like a woman in travail for now shalt thou go forth out of
the city and thou shalt dwell in the field and thou shalt go
even to Babylon there shalt thou be delivered there the lord
shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.
now also many nations are gathered against thee that say let
her be defiled and let our eye look upon Zion.
but they know not the thoughts of the lord Neither understand
they his counsel for he shall gather them as the sheaves into
the floor.
Arise and thresh O daughter of Zion for I will make thine
horn Iron and I will make thy hoofs brass and thou shalt
beat in pieces many people and I will consecrate their gain
unto the lord and their substance unto the lord of the whole
earth.
now gather thyself in troops O daughter of troops he hath
laid siege against us they shall smite the judge of Israel
with a rod upon the cheek.
but thou Bethlehem Ephratah though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah yet out of thee shall he come forth unto
me that is to be ruler in Israel whose goings forth have been
from of old from everlasting.
therefore will he give them up until the time that she which
travaileth hath brought forth then the remnant of his
brethren shall return unto the children of Israel.
and he shall stand and feed in the strength of the lord in
the majesty of the name of the lord his God and they shall
abide for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.
and this man shall be the peace when the Assyrian shall come
into our land and when he shall tread in our palaces then
shall we raise against him seven shepherds and eight
principal men.
and they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword and
the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof thus shall he
deliver us from the Assyrian when he cometh into our land
and when he treadeth within our borders.
and the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people
as a dew from the lord as the showers upon the grass that
tarrieth not for man nor waiteth for the sons of men.
and the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the
midst of many people as a lion among the beasts of the forest
as a young lion among the flocks of sheep who if he go
through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces and none
can deliver.
thine hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries and all
thine enemies shall be cut off.
and it shall come to pass in that day saith the lord that I
will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee and I will
destroy thy chariots
and I will cut off the cities of thy land and throw down all
thy strong holds
and I will cut off witchcrafts out of thine hand and thou
shalt have no more soothsayers
thy graven images also will I cut off and thy standing images
out of the midst of thee and thou shalt no more worship the
work of thine hands.
and I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee so
will I destroy thy cities.
and I will execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the
heathen such as they have not heard.
hear ye now what the lord saith Arise contend thou before
the mountains and let the hills hear thy voice.
hear ye O mountains the lord s controversy and ye strong
foundations of the earth for the lord hath a controversy with
his people and he will plead with Israel.
O my people what have I done unto thee? and wherein have I
wearied thee? testify against me.
for I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt and redeemed
thee out of the house of servants and I sent before thee
Moses Aaron and Miriam.
O my people remember now what Balak king of Moab consulted
and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from Shittim unto
Gilgal that ye may know the righteousness of the lord.
wherewith shall I come before the lord and bow myself before
the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings
with calves of a year old?
will the lord be pleased with thousands of rams or with Ten
thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my
transgression the fruit of my body for the Sin of my soul?
he hath shewed thee O man what is good and what doth the
lord require of thee but to do justly and to love mercy and
to walk humbly with thy God?
the lord s voice crieth unto the city and the man of wisdom
shall see thy name hear ye the rod and who hath appointed
it.
are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked and the scant measure that is abominable?
shall I count them pure with the wicked balances and with the
bag of deceitful weights?
for the rich men thereof are full of violence and the
inhabitants thereof have spoken lies and their tongue is
deceitful in their mouth.
therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee in
making thee desolate because of thy sins.
thou shalt eat but not be satisfied and thy casting down
shall be in the midst of thee and thou shalt take hold but
shalt not deliver and that which thou deliverest will I give
up to the sword.
thou shalt sow but thou shalt not reap thou shalt tread the
olives but thou shalt not anoint thee with oil and sweet
wine but shalt not drink wine.
for the statutes of Omri are kept and all the works of the
house of Ahab and ye walk in their counsels that I should
make thee a desolation and the inhabitants thereof an
hissing therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people.
woe is me for I Am as when they have gathered the summer
fruits as the grapegleanings of the vintage there is no
cluster to eat my soul desired the firstripe fruit.
the good man is perished out of the earth and there is none
upright among men they all lie in wait for blood they hunt
every man his brother with a net.
that they may do evil with both hands earnestly the prince
asketh and the judge asketh for a reward and the great man
he uttereth his mischievous desire so they wrap it up.
the best of them is as a brier the most upright is sharper
than a thorn hedge the day of thy watchmen and thy visitation
cometh now shall be their perplexity.
trust ye not in a friend put ye not confidence in a guide
keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom.
for the son dishonoureth the father the daughter riseth up
against her mother the daughter in law against her mother in
law a man s enemies are the men of his own house.
therefore I will look unto the lord I will wait for the God
of my salvation my God will hear me.
rejoice not against me O mine enemy when I fall I shall
Arise when I sit in darkness the lord shall be a light unto
me.
I will bear the indignation of the lord because I have sinned
against him until he plead my cause and execute judgment for
me he will bring me forth to the light and I shall behold
his righteousness.
then she that is mine enemy shall see it and shame shall
cover her which said unto me where is the lord thy God? mine
eyes shall behold her now shall she be trodden down as the
mire of the streets.
in the day that thy walls are to be built in that day shall
the decree be far removed.
in that day also he shall come even to thee from Assyria and
from the fortified cities and from the fortress even to the
river and from sea to sea and from mountain to mountain.
notwithstanding the land shall be desolate because of them
that dwell therein for the fruit of their doings.
feed thy people with thy rod the flock of thine heritage
which dwell solitarily in the wood in the midst of Carmel
let them feed in Bashan and Gilead as in the days of old.
according to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt
will I shew unto him marvellous things.
the nations shall see and be confounded at all their might
they shall lay their hand upon their mouth their ears shall
be deaf.
they shall lick the dust like a serpent they shall move out
of their holes like worms of the earth they shall be afraid
of the lord our God and shall fear because of thee.
who is a God like unto thee that pardoneth iniquity and
passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage?
he retaineth not his anger for ever because he delighteth in
mercy.
he will turn again he will have compassion upon us he will
subdue our iniquities and thou wilt cast all their sins into
the depths of the sea.
thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob and the mercy to
Abraham which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days
of old.
the burden of Nineveh. the book of the vision of Nahum the
Elkoshite.
God is jealous and the lord revengeth the lord revengeth
and is furious the lord will take vengeance on his
adversaries and he reserveth wrath for his enemies.
the lord is slow to anger and great in power and will not at
all acquit the wicked the lord hath his way in the whirlwind
and in the storm and the clouds are the dust of his feet.
he rebuketh the sea and maketh it dry and drieth up all the
rivers Bashan languisheth and Carmel and the flower of
Lebanon languisheth.
the mountains quake at him and the hills melt and the earth
is burned at his presence yea the world and all that dwell
therein.
who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the
fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire and
the rocks are thrown down by him.
the lord is good a strong hold in the day of trouble and he
knoweth them that trust in him.
but with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the
place thereof and darkness shall pursue his enemies.
what do ye imagine against the lord? he will make an utter
end affliction shall not rise up the second time.
for while they be folden together as thorns and while they
are drunken as drunkards they shall be devoured as stubble
fully dry.
there is one come out of thee that imagineth evil against the
lord a wicked counsellor.
thus saith the lord though they be quiet and likewise many
yet thus shall they be cut down when he shall pass through.
though I have afflicted thee I will afflict thee no more.
for now will I break his yoke from off thee and will burst
thy bonds in sunder.
and the lord hath given a commandment concerning thee that no
more of thy name be sown out of the house of thy gods will I
cut off the graven image and the molten image I will make thy
grave for thou art vile.
behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good
tidings that publisheth peace O Judah keep thy solemn
feasts perform thy vows for the wicked shall no more pass
through thee he is utterly cut off.
he that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face keep the
munition watch the way make thy loins strong fortify thy
power mightily.
for the lord hath turned away the excellency of Jacob as the
excellency of Israel for the emptiers have emptied them out
and marred their vine branches.
the shield of his Mighty men is made red the valiant men are
in scarlet the chariots shall be with flaming torches in the
day of his preparation and the fir trees shall be terribly
shaken.
the chariots shall rage in the streets they shall justle one
against another in the broad ways they shall seem like
torches they shall run like the lightnings.
he shall recount his worthies they shall stumble in their
walk they shall make haste to the wall thereof and the
defence shall be prepared.
the gates of the rivers shall be opened and the palace shall
be dissolved.
and Huzzab shall be led away captive she shall be brought up
and her maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves
tabering upon their breasts.
but Nineveh is of old like a pool of water yet they shall
flee away. stand stand shall they cry but none shall look
back.
take ye the spoil of Silver take the spoil of gold for there
is none end of the store and glory out of all the pleasant
furniture.
she is empty and void and waste and the heart melteth and
the knees smite together and Much pain is in all loins and
the faces of them all gather blackness.
where is the dwelling of the lions and the feedingplace of
the young lions where the lion even the old lion walked
and the lion s whelp and none made them afraid?
the lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps and
strangled for his lionesses and filled his holes with prey
and his dens with ravin.
behold I Am against thee saith the lord of hosts and I will
burn her chariots in the smoke and the sword shall devour thy
young lions and I will cut off thy prey from the earth and
the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.
woe to the bloody city it is all full of lies and robbery
the prey departeth not
the noise of a whip and the noise of the rattling of the
wheels and of the pransing horses and of the jumping
chariots.
the horseman lifteth up both the bright sword and the
glittering spear and there is a multitude of slain and a
great number of carcases and there is none end of their
corpses they stumble upon their corpses
because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wellfavoured
harlot the mistress of witchcrafts that selleth nations
through her whoredoms and families through her witchcrafts.
behold I Am against thee saith the lord of hosts and I will
discover thy skirts upon thy face and I will shew the nations
thy nakedness and the kingdoms thy shame.
and I will cast abominable filth upon thee and make thee
vile and will set thee as a gazingstock.
and it shall come to pass that all they that look upon thee
shall flee from thee and say Nineveh is laid waste who will
bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for thee?
art thou better than populous no that was situate among the
rivers that had the waters round about it whose rampart was
the sea and her wall was from the sea?
Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength and it was infinite put
and Lubim were thy helpers.
yet was she carried away she went into captivity her young
children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the
streets and they cast lots for her honourable men and all
her great men were bound in chains.
thou also shalt be drunken thou shalt be hid thou also shalt
seek strength because of the enemy.
all thy strong holds shall be like fig trees with the
firstripe figs if they be shaken they shall even fall into
the mouth of the eater.
behold thy people in the midst of thee are women the gates
of thy land shall be set wide open unto thine enemies the
fire shall devour thy bars.
draw thee waters for the siege fortify thy strong holds go
into clay and tread the morter make strong the brickkiln.
there shall the fire devour thee the sword shall cut thee
off it shall eat thee up like the cankerworm make thyself
many as the cankerworm make thyself many as the locusts.
thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven
the cankerworm spoileth and fleeth away.
thy crowned are as the locusts and thy captains as the great
grasshoppers which camp in the hedges in the cold day but
when the sun ariseth they flee away and their place is not
known where they are.
thy shepherds slumber O king of Assyria thy nobles shall
dwell in the dust thy people is scattered upon the mountains
and no man gathereth them.
there is no healing of thy bruise thy wound is grievous all
that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands over thee
for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?
the burden which Habakkuk the prophet did see.
O lord how long shall I cry and thou wilt not hear even cry
out unto thee of violence and thou wilt not save
why dost thou shew me iniquity and cause me to behold
grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me and there
are that raise up strife and contention.
therefore the law is slacked and judgment doth never go
forth for the wicked doth compass about the righteous
therefore wrong judgment proceedeth.
behold ye among the heathen and regard and wonder
marvelously for I will work a work in your days which ye will
not believe though it be told you.
for lo I raise up the Chaldeans that bitter and hasty
nation which shall march through the breadth of the land to
possess the dwellingplaces that are not their s.
they are terrible and dreadful their judgment and their
dignity shall proceed of themselves.
their horses also are swifter than the leopards and are more
fierce than the evening wolves and their horsemen shall
spread themselves and their horsemen shall come from far
they shall fly as the eagle that hasteth to eat.
they shall come all for violence their faces shall sup up as
the east wind and they shall gather the captivity as the
sand.
and they shall scoff at the kings and the princes shall be a
scorn unto them they shall deride every strong hold for they
shall heap dust and take it.
then shall his mind change and he shall pass over and
offend imputing this his power unto his God.
art thou not from everlasting O lord my God mine holy one?
we shall not die. O lord thou hast ordained them for
judgment and O Mighty God thou hast established them for
correction.
thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil and canst not look
on iniquity wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal
treacherously and holdest thy tongue when the wicked
devoureth the man that is more righteous than he?
and makest men as the fishes of the sea as the creeping
things that have no ruler over them?
they take up all of them with the angle they catch them in
their net and gather them in their drag therefore they
rejoice and are glad.
therefore they sacrifice unto their net and burn incense unto
their drag because by them their portion is fat and their
meat plenteous.
shall they therefore empty their net and not spare
continually to slay the nations?
I will stand upon my watch and set me upon the tower and
will watch to see what he will say unto me and what I shall
answer when I Am reproved.
and the lord answered me and said write the vision and make
it plain upon tables that he may run that readeth it.
for the vision is yet for an appointed time but at the end it
shall speak and not lie though it tarry wait for it
because it will surely come it will not tarry.
behold his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him but
the just shall live by his faith.
yea also because he transgresseth by wine he is a proud man
Neither keepeth at home who enlargeth his desire as hell and
is as death and cannot be satisfied but gathereth unto him
all nations and heapeth unto him all people
shall not all these take up a parable against him and a
taunting proverb against him and say woe to him that
increaseth that which is not his how long? and to him that
ladeth himself with thick clay
shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee and
awake that shall vex thee and thou shalt be for booties unto
them?
because thou hast spoiled many nations all the remnant of the
people shall spoil thee because of men s blood and for the
violence of the land of the city and of all that dwell
therein.
woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house
that he may set his nest on high that he may be delivered
from the power of evil
thou hast consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many
people and hast sinned against thy soul.
for the stone shall cry out of the wall and the beam out of
the timber shall answer it.
woe to him that buildeth a town with blood and stablisheth a
city by iniquity
behold is it not of the lord of hosts that the people shall
labour in the very fire and the people shall weary themselves
for very vanity?
for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory
of the lord as the waters cover the sea.
woe unto him that giveth his neighbour drink that puttest thy
bottle to him and makest him drunken also that thou mayest
look on their nakedness
thou art filled with shame for glory drink thou also and let
thy foreskin be uncovered the cup of the lord s right hand
shall be turned unto thee and shameful spewing shall be on
thy glory.
for the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee and the spoil of
beasts which made them afraid because of men s blood and
for the violence of the land of the city and of all that
dwell therein.
what profiteth the graven image that the maker thereof hath
graven it the molten image and a teacher of lies that the
maker of his work trusteth therein to make dumb idols?
woe unto him that saith to the wood awake to the dumb stone
Arise it shall teach behold it is laid over with gold and
Silver and there is no breath at all in the midst of it.
but the lord is in his holy temple let all the earth keep
silence before him.
a prayer of Habakkuk the prophet upon Shigionoth.
O lord I have heard thy speech and was afraid O lord
revive thy work in the midst of the years in the midst of the
years make known in wrath remember mercy.
God came from Teman and the holy one from mount Paran. Selah.
his glory covered the heavens and the earth was full of his
praise.
and his brightness was as the light he had horns coming out
of his hand and there was the hiding of his power.
before him went the pestilence and burning coals went forth
at his feet.
he stood and measured the earth he beheld and drove asunder
the nations and the everlasting mountains were scattered the
perpetual hills did bow his ways are everlasting.
I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction and the curtains of
the land of Midian did tremble.
was the lord displeased against the rivers? was thine anger
against the rivers? was thy wrath against the sea that thou
didst ride upon thine horses and thy chariots of salvation?
thy bow was made quite naked according to the oaths of the
tribes even thy word. Selah. thou didst cleave the earth with
rivers.
the mountains saw thee and they trembled the overflowing of
the water passed by the deep uttered his voice and lifted up
his hands on high.
the sun and moon stood still in their habitation at the light
of thine arrows they went and at the shining of thy
glittering spear.
thou didst march through the land in indignation thou didst
thresh the heathen in anger.
thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people even for
salvation with thine anointed thou woundedst the head out of
the house of the wicked by discovering the foundation unto
the neck. Selah.
thou didst strike through with his staves the head of his
villages they came out as a whirlwind to scatter me their
rejoicing was as to devour the poor secretly.
thou didst walk through the sea with thine horses through the
heap of great waters.
when I heard my belly trembled my lips quivered at the
voice rottenness entered into my bones and I trembled in
myself that I might rest in the day of trouble when he
cometh up unto the people he will invade them with his
troops.
although the fig tree shall not blossom Neither shall fruit
be in the vines the labour of the olive shall fail and the
fields shall yield no meat the flock shall be cut off from
the fold and there shall be no herd in the stalls
yet I will rejoice in the lord I will joy in the God of my
salvation.
the lord God is my strength and he will make my feet like
hinds feet and he will make me to walk upon mine high
places. to the chief singer on my stringed instruments.
the word of the lord which came unto Zephaniah the son of
Cushi the son of Gedaliah the son of Amariah the son of
Hizkiah in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah.
I will utterly consume all things from off the land saith the
lord.
I will consume man and beast I will consume the fowls of the
heaven and the fishes of the sea and the stumblingblocks
with the wicked and I will cut off man from off the land
saith the lord.
I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah and upon all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem and I will cut off the remnant of
Baal from this place and the name of the Chemarims with the
priests
and them that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops
and them that worship and that swear by the lord and that
swear by Malcham
and them that are turned back from the lord and those that
have not sought the lord nor enquired for him.
hold thy peace at the presence of the lord God for the day of
the lord is at hand for the lord hath prepared a sacrifice
he hath bid his guests.
and it shall come to pass in the day of the lord s sacrifice
that I will punish the princes and the king s children and
all such as are clothed with strange apparel.
in the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the
threshold which fill their masters houses with violence and
deceit.
and it shall come to pass in that day saith the lord that
there shall be the noise of a cry from the fish gate and an
howling from the second and a great crashing from the hills.
howl ye inhabitants of Maktesh for all the merchant people
are cut down all they that bear Silver are cut off.
and it shall come to pass at that time that I will search
Jerusalem with candles and punish the men that are settled on
their lees that say in their heart the lord will not do
good Neither will he do evil.
therefore their goods shall become a booty and their houses a
desolation they shall also build houses but not inhabit
them and they shall plant vineyards but not drink the wine
thereof.
the great day of the lord is near it is near and hasteth
greatly even the voice of the day of the lord the Mighty man
shall cry there bitterly.
that day is a day of wrath a day of trouble and distress a
day of wasteness and desolation a day of darkness and
gloominess a day of clouds and thick darkness
a day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities and
against the high towers.
and I will bring distress upon men that they shall walk like
blind men because they have sinned against the lord and
their blood shall be poured out as dust and their flesh as
the dung.
Neither their Silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver
them in the day of the lord s wrath but the whole land shall
be devoured by the fire of his jealousy for he shall make
even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.
gather yourselves together yea gather together O nation not
desired
before the decree bring forth before the day pass as the
chaff before the fierce anger of the lord come upon you
before the day of the lord s anger come upon you.
seek ye the lord all ye meek of the earth which have wrought
his judgment seek righteousness seek meekness it may be ye
shall be hid in the day of the lord s anger.
for Gaza shall be forsaken and Ashkelon a desolation they
shall drive out Ashdod at the noon day and Ekron shall be
rooted up.
woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast the nation of the
Cherethites the word of the lord is against you O Canaan
the land of the Philistines I will even destroy thee that
there shall be no inhabitant.
and the sea coast shall be dwellings and cottages for
shepherds and folds for flocks.
and the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah
they shall feed thereupon in the houses of Ashkelon shall
they lie down in the evening for the lord their God shall
visit them and turn away their captivity.
I have heard the reproach of Moab and the revilings of the
children of Ammon whereby they have reproached my people and
magnified themselves against their border.
therefore as I live saith the lord of hosts the God of
Israel surely Moab shall be as Sodom and the children of
Ammon as Gomorrah even the breeding of nettles and saltpits
and a perpetual desolation the residue of my people shall
spoil them and the remnant of my people shall possess them.
this shall they have for their pride because they have
reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the
lord of hosts.
the lord will be terrible unto them for he will famish all
the gods of the earth and men shall worship him every one
from his place even all the isles of the heathen.
ye Ethiopians also ye shall be slain by my sword.
and he will stretch out his hand against the north and
destroy Assyria and will make Nineveh a desolation and dry
like a wilderness.
and flocks shall lie down in the midst of her all the beasts
of the nations both the cormorant and the bittern shall lodge
in the upper lintels of it their voice shall sing in the
windows desolation shall be in the thresholds for he shall
uncover the cedar work.
this is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly that said in
her heart I Am and there is none beside me how is she
become a desolation a place for beasts to lie down in every
one that passeth by her shall hiss and wag his hand.
woe to her that is filthy and polluted to the oppressing
city
she obeyed not the voice she received not correction she
trusted not in the lord she drew not near to her God.
her princes within her are roaring lions her judges are
evening wolves they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.
her prophets are light and treacherous persons her priests
have polluted the sanctuary they have done violence to the
law.
the just lord is in the midst thereof he will not do
iniquity every morning doth he bring his judgment to light
he faileth not but the unjust knoweth no shame.
I have cut off the nations their towers are desolate I made
their streets waste that none passeth by their cities are
destroyed so that there is no man that there is none
inhabitant.
I said surely thou wilt fear me thou wilt receive
instruction so their dwelling should not be cut off
howsoever I punished them but they rose early and corrupted
all their doings.
therefore wait ye upon me saith the lord until the day that
I rise up to the prey for my determination is to gather the
nations that I may assemble the kingdoms to pour upon them
mine indignation even all my fierce anger for all the earth
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.
for then will I turn to the people a pure language that they
may all call upon the name of the lord to serve him with one
consent.
from beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my suppliants even the
daughter of my dispersed shall bring mine offering.
in that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings
wherein thou hast transgressed against me for then I will
take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoice in thy
pride and thou shalt no more be haughty because of my holy
mountain.
I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor
people and they shall trust in the name of the lord.
the remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity nor speak lies
Neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth for
they shall feed and lie down and none shall make them afraid.
sing O daughter of Zion shout O Israel be glad and rejoice
with all the heart O daughter of Jerusalem.
the lord hath taken away thy judgments he hath cast out thine
enemy the king of Israel even the lord is in the midst of
thee thou shalt not see evil any more.
in that day it shall be said to Jerusalem fear thou not and
to Zion let not thine hands be slack.
the lord thy God in the midst of thee is Mighty he will save
he will rejoice over thee with joy he will rest in his love
he will joy over thee with singing.
I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly
who are of thee to whom the reproach of it was a burden.
behold at that time I will undo all that afflict thee and I
will save her that halteth and gather her that was driven
out and I will get them praise and fame in every land where
they have been put to shame.
at that time will I bring you again even in the time that I
gather you for I will make you a name and a praise among all
people of the earth when I turn back your captivity before
your eyes saith the lord.
in the second year of Darius the king in the sixth month in
the first day of the month came the word of the lord by
Haggai the prophet unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel
Governor of Judah and to Joshua the son of Josedech the high
priest saying
thus speaketh the lord of hosts saying this people say the
time is not come the time that the lord s house should be
built.
then came the word of the lord by Haggai the prophet saying
is it time for you O ye to dwell in your cieled houses and
this house lie waste?
now therefore thus saith the lord of hosts consider your
ways.
ye have sown Much and bring in little ye eat but ye have
not enough ye drink but ye are not filled with drink ye
clothe you but there is none warm and he that earneth wages
earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes.
thus saith the lord of hosts consider your ways.
go up to the mountain and bring wood and build the house
and I will take pleasure in it and I will be glorified saith
the lord.
ye looked for Much and lo it came to little and when ye
brought it home I did blow upon it. why? saith the lord of
hosts. because of mine house that is waste and ye run every
man unto his own house.
therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew and the
earth is stayed from her fruit.
and I called for a drought upon the land and upon the
mountains and upon the corn and upon the new wine and upon
the oil and upon that which the ground bringeth forth and
upon men and upon cattle and upon all the labour of the
hands.
then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Joshua the son of
Josedech the high priest with all the remnant of the people
obeyed the voice of the lord their God and the words of
Haggai the prophet as the lord their God had sent him and
the people did fear before the lord.
then spake Haggai the lord s messenger in the lord s message
unto the people saying I Am with you saith the lord.
and the lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel Governor of Judah and the spirit of Joshua the son
of Josedech the high priest and the spirit of all the
remnant of the people and they came and did work in the house
of the lord of hosts their God
in the four and twentieth day of the sixth month in the
second year of Darius the king.
in the seventh month in the one and twentieth day of the
month came the word of the lord by the prophet Haggai
saying
speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel Governor of
Judah and to Joshua the son of Josedech the high priest and
to the residue of the people saying
who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory?
and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison
of it as nothing?
yet now be strong O Zerubbabel saith the lord and be
strong O Joshua son of Josedech the high priest and be
strong all ye people of the land saith the lord and work
for I Am with you saith the lord of hosts
according to the word that I covenanted with you when ye came
out of Egypt so my spirit remaineth among you fear ye not.
for thus saith the lord of hosts yet once it is a little
while and I will shake the heavens and the earth and the
sea and the dry land
and I will shake all nations and the desire of all nations
shall come and I will fill this house with glory saith the
lord of hosts.
the Silver is mine and the gold is mine saith the lord of
hosts.
the glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the
former saith the lord of hosts and in this place will I give
peace saith the lord of hosts.
in the four and twentieth day of the ninth month in the
second year of Darius came the word of the lord by Haggai the
prophet saying
thus saith the lord of hosts ask now the priests concerning
the law saying
if one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment and with
his skirt do touch bread or pottage or wine or oil or any
meat shall it be holy? and the priests answered and said no.
then said Haggai if one that is unclean by a dead body touch
any of these shall it be unclean? and the priests answered
and said it shall be unclean.
then answered Haggai and said so is this people and so is
this nation before me saith the lord and so is every work of
their hands and that which they offer there is unclean.
and now I pray you consider from this day and upward from
before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the
lord
since those days were when one came to an heap of twenty
measures there were but Ten when one came to the pressfat
for to draw out fifty vessels out of the press there were but
twenty.
I smote you with blasting and with mildew and with hail in all
the labours of your hands yet ye turned not to me saith the
lord.
consider now from this day and upward from the four and
twentieth day of the ninth month even from the day that the
foundation of the lord s temple was laid consider it.
is the seed yet in the barn? yea as yet the vine and the fig
tree and the pomegranate and the olive tree hath not
brought forth from this day will I bless you.
and again the word of the lord came unto Haggai in the four
and twentieth day of the month saying
speak to Zerubbabel Governor of Judah saying I will shake
the heavens and the earth
and I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms and I will
destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the heathen and I
will overthrow the chariots and those that ride in them and
the horses and their riders shall come down every one by the
sword of his brother.
in that day saith the lord of hosts will I take thee O
Zerubbabel my servant the son of Shealtiel saith the lord
and will make thee as a signet for I have chosen thee saith
the lord of hosts.
in the eighth month in the second year of Darius came the
word of the lord unto Zechariah the son of Berechiah the son
of Iddo the prophet saying
the lord hath been sore displeased with your fathers.
therefore say thou unto them thus saith the lord of hosts
turn ye unto me saith the lord of hosts and I will turn unto
you saith the lord of hosts.
be ye not as your fathers unto whom the former prophets have
cried saying thus saith the lord of hosts turn ye now from
your evil ways and from your evil doings but they did not
hear nor hearken unto me saith the lord.
your fathers where are they? and the prophets do they live
for ever?
but my words and my statutes which I commanded my servants
the prophets did they not take hold of your fathers? and they
returned and said like as the lord of hosts thought to do
unto us according to our ways and according to our doings
so hath he dealt with us.
upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month which
is the month Sebat in the second year of Darius came the
word of the lord unto Zechariah the son of Berechiah the son
of Iddo the prophet saying
I saw by night and behold a man riding upon a red horse and
he stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom and
behind him were there red horses speckled and white.
then said I O my lord what are these? and the angel that
talked with me said unto me I will shew thee what these be.
and the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered and
said these are they whom the lord hath sent to walk to and
fro through the earth.
and they answered the angel of the lord that stood among the
myrtle trees and said we have walked to and fro through the
earth and behold all the earth sitteth still and is at
rest.
then the angel of the lord answered and said O lord of hosts
how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the
cities of Judah against which thou hast had indignation these
threescore and Ten years?
and the lord answered the angel that talked with me with good
words and comfortable words.
so the angel that communed with me said unto me cry thou
saying thus saith the lord of hosts I Am jealous for
Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy.
and I Am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at
ease for I was but a little displeased and they helped
forward the affliction.
therefore thus saith the lord I Am returned to Jerusalem with
mercies my house shall be built in it saith the lord of
hosts and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.
cry yet saying thus saith the lord of hosts my cities
through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad and the lord
shall yet comfort Zion and shall yet choose Jerusalem.
then lifted I up mine eyes and saw and behold four horns.
and I said unto the angel that talked with me what be these?
and he answered me these are the horns which have scattered
Judah Israel and Jerusalem.
and the lord shewed me four carpenters.
then said I what come these to do? and he spake saying
these are the horns which have scattered Judah so that no man
did lift up his head but these are come to fray them to cast
out the horns of the Gentiles which lifted up their horn over
the land of Judah to scatter it.
I lifted up mine eyes again and looked and behold a man with
a measuring line in his hand.
then said I whither goest thou? and he said unto me to
measure Jerusalem to see what is the breadth thereof and
what is the length thereof.
and behold the angel that talked with me went forth and
another angel went out to meet him
and said unto him run speak to this young man saying
Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the
multitude of men and cattle therein
for I saith the lord will be unto her a wall of fire round
about and will be the glory in the midst of her.
ho ho come forth and flee from the land of the north saith
the lord for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of
the heaven saith the lord.
deliver thyself O Zion that dwellest with the daughter of
Babylon.
for thus saith the lord of hosts after the glory hath he sent
me unto the nations which spoiled you for he that toucheth
you toucheth the apple of his eye.
for behold I will shake mine hand upon them and they shall
be a spoil to their servants and ye shall know that the lord
of hosts hath sent me.
sing and rejoice O daughter of Zion for lo I come and I
will dwell in the midst of thee saith the lord.
and many nations shall be joined to the lord in that day and
shall be my people and I will dwell in the midst of thee and
thou shalt know that the lord of hosts hath sent me unto thee.
and the lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land
and shall choose Jerusalem again.
be silent O all flesh before the lord for he is raised up
out of his holy habitation.
and he shewed me Joshua the high priest standing before the
angel of the lord and Satan standing at his right hand to
resist him.
and the lord said unto Satan the lord rebuke thee O Satan
even the lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee is not
this a brand plucked out of the fire?
now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments and stood before
the angel.
and he answered and spake unto those that stood before him
saying take away the filthy garments from him. and unto him
he said behold I have caused thine iniquity to pass from
thee and I will clothe thee with change of raiment.
and I said let them set a fair mitre upon his head. so they
set a fair mitre upon his head and clothed him with garments.
and the angel of the lord stood by.
and the angel of the lord protested unto Joshua saying
thus saith the lord of hosts if thou wilt walk in my ways
and if thou wilt keep my charge then thou shalt also judge my
house and shalt also keep my courts and I will give thee
places to walk among these that stand by.
hear now O Joshua the high priest thou and thy fellows that
sit before thee for they are men wondered at for behold I
will bring forth my servant the branch.
for behold the stone that I have laid before Joshua upon one
stone shall be seven eyes behold I will engrave the graving
thereof saith the lord of hosts and I will remove the
iniquity of that land in one day.
in that day saith the lord of hosts shall ye call every man
his neighbour under the vine and under the fig tree.
and the angel that talked with me came again and waked me as
a man that is wakened out of his sleep.
and said unto me what seest thou? and I said I have looked
and behold a candlestick all of gold with a bowl upon the top
of it and his seven lamps thereon and seven pipes to the
seven lamps which are upon the top thereof
and two olive trees by it one upon the right side of the
bowl and the other upon the left side thereof.
so I answered and spake to the angel that talked with me
saying what are these my lord?
then the angel that talked with me answered and said unto me
knowest thou not what these be? and I said no my lord.
then he answered and spake unto me saying this is the word
of the lord unto Zerubbabel saying not by might nor by
power but by my spirit saith the lord of hosts.
who art thou O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shalt
become a plain and he shall bring forth the headstone thereof
with shoutings crying grace grace unto it.
moreover the word of the lord came unto me saying
the hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this
house his hands shall also finish it and thou shalt know
that the lord of hosts hath sent me unto you.
for who hath despised the day of small things? for they shall
rejoice and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel
with those seven they are the eyes of the lord which run to
and fro through the whole earth.
then answered I and said unto him what are these two olive
trees upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left
side thereof?
and I answered again and said unto him what be these two
olive branches which through the two golden pipes empty the
golden oil out of themselves?
and he answered me and said knowest thou not what these be?
and I said no my lord.
then said he these are the two anointed ones that stand by
the lord of the whole earth.
then I turned and lifted up mine eyes and looked and behold
a flying roll.
and he said unto me what seest thou? and I answered I see a
flying roll the length thereof is twenty cubits and the
breadth thereof Ten cubits.
then said he unto me this is the curse that goeth forth over
the face of the whole earth for every one that stealeth shall
be cut off as on this side according to it and every one that
sweareth shall be cut off as on that side according to it.
I will bring it forth saith the lord of hosts and it shall
enter into the house of the thief and into the house of him
that sweareth falsely by my name and it shall remain in the
midst of his house and shall consume it with the timber
thereof and the stones thereof.
then the angel that talked with me went forth and said unto
me lift up now thine eyes and see what is this that goeth
forth.
and I said what is it? and he said this is an Ephah that
goeth forth. he said moreover this is their resemblance
through all the earth.
and behold there was lifted up a talent of lead and this is
a woman that sitteth in the midst of the Ephah.
and he said this is wickedness. and he cast it into the midst
of the Ephah and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth
thereof.
then lifted I up mine eyes and looked and behold there
came out two women and the wind was in their wings for they
had wings like the wings of a stork and they lifted up the
Ephah between the earth and the heaven.
then said I to the angel that talked with me whither do these
bear the Ephah?
and he said unto me to build it an house in the land of
Shinar and it shall be established and set there upon her
own base.
and I turned and lifted up mine eyes and looked and
behold there came four chariots out from between two
mountains and the mountains were mountains of brass.
in the first chariot were red horses and in the second
chariot black horses
and in the third chariot white horses and in the fourth
chariot grisled and bay horses.
then I answered and said unto the angel that talked with me
what are these my lord?
and the angel answered and said unto me these are the four
spirits of the heavens which go forth from standing before
the lord of all the earth.
the black horses which are therein go forth into the north
country and the white go forth after them and the grisled go
forth toward the south country.
and the bay went forth and sought to go that they might walk
to and fro through the earth and he said get you hence walk
to and fro through the earth. so they walked to and fro
through the earth.
then cried he upon me and spake unto me saying behold
these that go toward the north country have quieted my spirit
in the north country.
and the word of the lord came unto me saying
take of them of the captivity even of Heldai of Tobijah and
of Jedaiah which are come from Babylon and come thou the
same day and go into the house of Josiah the son of
Zephaniah
then take Silver and gold and make crowns and set them upon
the head of Joshua the son of Josedech the high priest
and speak unto him saying thus speaketh the lord of hosts
saying behold the man whose name is the branch and he shall
grow up out of his place and he shall build the temple of the
lord
even he shall build the temple of the lord and he shall bear
the glory and shall sit and rule upon his throne and he
shall be a priest upon his throne and the counsel of peace
shall be between them both.
and the crowns shall be to Helem and to Tobijah and to
Jedaiah and to Hen the son of Zephaniah for a memorial in
the temple of the lord.
and they that are far off shall come and build in the temple
of the lord and ye shall know that the lord of hosts hath
sent me unto you. and this shall come to pass if ye will
diligently obey the voice of the lord your God.
and it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius that
the word of the lord came unto Zechariah in the fourth day of
the ninth month even in Chisleu
when they had sent unto the house of God Sherezer and
Regemmelech and their men to pray before the lord
and to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the
lord of hosts and to the prophets saying should I weep in
the fifth month separating myself as I have done these so
many years?
then came the word of the lord of hosts unto me saying
speak unto all the people of the land and to the priests
saying when ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh
month even those seventy years did ye at all fast unto me
even to me?
and when ye did eat and when ye did drink did not ye eat for
yourselves and drink for yourselves?
should ye not hear the words which the lord hath cried by the
former prophets when Jerusalem was inhabited and in
prosperity and the cities thereof round about her when men
inhabited the south and the plain?
and the word of the lord came unto Zechariah saying
thus speaketh the lord of hosts saying execute true
judgment and shew mercy and compassions every man to his
brother
and oppress not the widow nor the fatherless the stranger
nor the poor and let none of you imagine evil against his
brother in your heart.
but they refused to hearken and pulled away the shoulder and
stopped their ears that they should not hear.
yea they made their hearts as an adamant stone lest they
should hear the law and the words which the lord of hosts
hath sent in his spirit by the former prophets therefore came
a great wrath from the lord of hosts.
therefore it is come to pass that as he cried and they would
not hear so they cried and I would not hear saith the lord
of hosts
but I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations
whom they knew not. thus the land was desolate after them
that no man passed through nor returned for they laid the
pleasant land desolate.
again the word of the lord of hosts came to me saying
thus saith the lord of hosts I was jealous for Zion with
great jealousy and I was jealous for her with great fury.
thus saith the lord I Am returned unto Zion and will dwell
in the midst of Jerusalem and Jerusalem shall be called a
city of truth and the mountain of the lord of hosts the holy
mountain.
thus saith the lord of hosts there shall yet old men and old
women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem and every man with
his staff in his hand for very age.
and the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls
playing in the streets thereof.
thus saith the lord of hosts if it be marvellous in the eyes
of the remnant of this people in these days should it also be
marvellous in mine eyes? saith the lord of hosts.
thus saith the lord of hosts behold I will save my people
from the east country and from the west country
and I will bring them and they shall dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem and they shall be my people and I will be their
God in truth and in righteousness.
thus saith the lord of hosts let your hands be strong ye
that hear in these days these words by the mouth of the
prophets which were in the day that the foundation of the
house of the lord of hosts was laid that the temple might be
built.
for before these days there was no hire for man nor any hire
for beast Neither was there any peace to him that went out or
came in because of the affliction for I set all men every one
against his neighbour.
but now I will not be unto the residue of this people as in
the former days saith the lord of hosts.
for the seed shall be prosperous the vine shall give her
fruit and the ground shall give her increase and the heavens
shall give their dew and I will cause the remnant of this
people to possess all these things.
and it shall come to pass that as ye were a curse among the
heathen O house of Judah and house of Israel so will I save
you and ye shall be a blessing fear not but let your hands
be strong.
for thus saith the lord of hosts as I thought to punish you
when your fathers provoked me to wrath saith the lord of
hosts and I repented not
so again have I thought in these days to do well unto
Jerusalem and to the house of Judah fear ye not.
these are the things that ye shall do speak ye every man the
truth to his neighbour execute the judgment of truth and
peace in your gates
and let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his
neighbour and love no false oath for all these are things
that I hate saith the lord.
and the word of the lord of hosts came unto me saying
thus saith the lord of hosts the fast of the fourth month
and the fast of the fifth and the fast of the seventh and
the fast of the tenth shall be to the house of Judah joy and
gladness and cheerful feasts therefore love the truth and
peace.
thus saith the lord of hosts it shall yet come to pass that
there shall come people and the inhabitants of many cities
and the inhabitants of one city shall go to another saying
let us go speedily to pray before the lord and to seek the
lord of hosts I will go also.
yea many people and strong nations shall come to seek the
lord of hosts in Jerusalem and to pray before the lord.
thus saith the lord of hosts in those days it shall come to
pass that Ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the
nations even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a
Jew saying we will go with you for we have heard that God
is with you.
the burden of the word of the lord in the land of Hadrach and
Damascus shall be the rest thereof when the eyes of man as
of all the tribes of Israel shall be toward the lord.
and Hamath also shall border thereby Tyrus and Zidon though
it be very wise.
and Tyrus did build herself a strong hold and heaped up
Silver as the dust and fine gold as the mire of the streets.
behold the lord will cast her out and he will smite her
power in the sea and she shall be devoured with fire.
Ashkelon shall see it and fear Gaza also shall see it and
be very sorrowful and Ekron for her expectation shall be
ashamed and the king shall perish from Gaza and Ashkelon
shall not be inhabited.
and a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod and I will cut off the
pride of the Philistines.
and I will take away his blood out of his mouth and his
abominations from between his teeth but he that remaineth
even he shall be for our God and he shall be as a Governor
in Judah and Ekron as a Jebusite.
and I will encamp about mine house because of the army
because of him that passeth by and because of him that
returneth and no oppressor shall pass through them any more
for now have I seen with mine eyes.
rejoice greatly O daughter of Zion shout O daughter of
Jerusalem behold thy king cometh unto thee he is just and
having salvation lowly and riding upon an ass and upon a
colt the foal of an ass.
and I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim and the horse
from Jerusalem and the battle bow shall be cut off and he
shall speak peace unto the heathen and his dominion shall be
from sea even to sea and from the river even to the ends of
the earth.
as for thee also by the blood of thy covenant I have sent
forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.
turn you to the strong hold ye prisoners of hope even to day
do I declare that I will render double unto thee
when I have bent Judah for me filled the bow with Ephraim
and raised up thy sons O Zion against thy sons O Greece
and made thee as the sword of a Mighty man.
and the lord shall be seen over them and his arrow shall go
forth as the lightning and the lord God shall blow the
trumpet and shall go with whirlwinds of the south.
the lord of hosts shall defend them and they shall devour
and subdue with sling stones and they shall drink and make a
noise as through wine and they shall be filled like bowls
and as the corners of the altar.
and the lord their God shall save them in that day as the
flock of his people for they shall be as the stones of a
crown lifted up as an ensign upon his land.
for how great is his goodness and how great is his beauty
corn shall make the young men cheerful and new wine the
maids.
ask ye of the lord rain in the time of the latter rain so the
lord shall make bright clouds and give them showers of rain
to every one grass in the field.
for the idols have spoken vanity and the diviners have seen a
lie and have told false dreams they comfort in vain
therefore they went their way as a flock they were troubled
because there was no Shepherd.
mine anger was kindled against the shepherds and I punished
the goats for the lord of hosts hath visited his flock the
house of Judah and hath made them as his goodly horse in the
battle.
out of him came forth the corner out of him the nail out of
him the battle bow out of him every oppressor together.
and they shall be as Mighty men which tread down their
enemies in the mire of the streets in the battle and they
shall fight because the lord is with them and the riders on
horses shall be confounded.
and I will strengthen the house of Judah and I will save the
house of Joseph and I will bring them again to place them
for I have mercy upon them and they shall be as though I had
not cast them off for I Am the lord their God and will hear
them.
and they of Ephraim shall be like a Mighty man and their
heart shall rejoice as through wine yea their children shall
see it and be glad their heart shall rejoice in the lord.
I will hiss for them and gather them for I have redeemed
them and they shall increase as they have increased.
and I will sow them among the people and they shall remember
me in far countries and they shall live with their children
and turn again.
I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt and
gather them out of Assyria and I will bring them into the
land of Gilead and Lebanon and place shall not be found for
them.
and he shall pass through the sea with affliction and shall
smite the waves in the sea and all the deeps of the river
shall dry up and the pride of Assyria shall be brought down
and the sceptre of Egypt shall depart away.
and I will strengthen them in the lord and they shall walk up
and down in his name saith the lord.
open thy doors O Lebanon that the fire may devour thy
cedars.
howl fir tree for the cedar is fallen because the Mighty
are spoiled howl O ye oaks of Bashan for the forest of the
vintage is come down.
there is a voice of the howling of the shepherds for their
glory is spoiled a voice of the roaring of young lions for
the pride of Jordan is spoiled.
thus saith the lord my God feed the flock of the slaughter
whose possessors slay them and hold themselves not guilty
and they that sell them say blessed be the lord for I Am
rich and their own shepherds pity them not.
for I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land saith the
lord but lo I will deliver the men every one into his
neighbour s hand and into the hand of his king and they
shall smite the land and out of their hand I will not deliver
them.
and I will feed the flock of slaughter even you O poor of
the flock. and I took unto me two staves the one I called
beauty and the other I called Bands and I fed the flock.
three shepherds also I cut off in one month and my soul
lothed them and their soul also abhorred me.
then said I I will not feed you that that dieth let it die
and that that is to be cut off let it be cut off and let the
rest eat every one the flesh of another.
and I took my staff even beauty and cut it asunder that I
might break my covenant which I had made with all the people.
and it was broken in that day and so the poor of the flock
that waited upon me knew that it was the word of the lord.
and I said unto them if ye think good give me my price and
if not forbear. so they weighed for my price thirty pieces of
Silver.
and the lord said unto me cast it unto the potter a goodly
price that I was prised at of them. and I took the thirty
pieces of Silver and cast them to the potter in the house of
the lord.
then I cut asunder mine other staff even Bands that I might
break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.
and the lord said unto me take unto thee yet the instruments
of a foolish Shepherd.
for lo I will raise up a Shepherd in the land which shall
not visit those that be cut off Neither shall seek the young
one nor heal that that is broken nor feed that that standeth
still but he shall eat the flesh of the fat and tear their
claws in pieces.
woe to the idol Shepherd that leaveth the flock the sword
shall be upon his arm and upon his right eye his arm shall
be clean dried up and his right eye shall be utterly
darkened.
the burden of the word of the lord for Israel saith the lord
which stretcheth forth the heavens and layeth the foundation
of the earth and formeth the spirit of man within him.
behold I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the
people round about when they shall be in the siege both
against Judah and against Jerusalem.
and in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for
all people all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in
pieces though all the people of the earth be gathered
together against it.
in that day saith the lord I will smite every horse with
astonishment and his rider with madness and I will open mine
eyes upon the house of Judah and will smite every horse of
the people with blindness.
and the governors of Judah shall say in their heart the
inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the lord of
hosts their God.
in that day will I make the governors of Judah like an hearth
of fire among the wood and like a torch of fire in a sheaf
and they shall devour all the people round about on the right
hand and on the left and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again
in her own place even in Jerusalem.
the lord also shall save the tents of Judah first that the
glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants
of Jerusalem do not magnify themselves against Judah.
in that day shall the lord defend the inhabitants of
Jerusalem and he that is feeble among them at that day shall
be as David and the house of David shall be as God as the
angel of the lord before them.
and it shall come to pass in that day that I will seek to
destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
and I will pour upon the house of David and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of
supplications and they shall look upon me whom they have
pierced and they shall mourn for him as one mourneth for his
only son and shall be in bitterness for him as one that is
in bitterness for his firstborn.
in that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem as
the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.
and the land shall mourn every family apart the family of
the house of David apart and their wives apart the family of
the house of Nathan apart and their wives apart
the family of the house of Levi apart and their wives apart
the family of Shimei apart and their wives apart
all the families that remain every family apart and their
wives apart.
in that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of
David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for Sin and for
uncleanness.
and it shall come to pass in that day saith the lord of
hosts that I will cut off the names of the idols out of the
land and they shall no more be remembered and also I will
cause the prophets and the unclean spirit to pass out of the
land.
and it shall come to pass that when any shall yet prophesy
then his father and his mother that begat him shall say unto
him thou shalt not live for thou speakest lies in the name
of the lord and his father and his mother that begat him
shall thrust him through when he prophesieth.
and it shall come to pass in that day that the prophets shall
be ashamed every one of his vision when he hath prophesied
Neither shall they wear a rough garment to deceive
but he shall say I Am no prophet I Am an husbandman for man
taught me to keep cattle from my youth.
and one shall say unto him what are these wounds in thine
hands? then he shall answer those with which I was wounded in
the house of my friends.
awake O sword against my Shepherd and against the man that
is my fellow saith the lord of hosts smite the Shepherd and
the sheep shall be scattered and I will turn mine hand upon
the little ones.
and it shall come to pass that in all the land saith the
lord two parts therein shall be cut off and die but the
third shall be left therein.
and I will bring the third part through the fire and will
refine them as Silver is refined and will try them as gold is
tried they shall call on my name and I will hear them I
will say it is my people and they shall say the lord is my
God.
behold the day of the lord cometh and thy spoil shall be
divided in the midst of thee.
for I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle and
the city shall be taken and the houses rifled and the women
ravished and half of the city shall go forth into captivity
and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the
city.
then shall the lord go forth and fight against those nations
as when he fought in the day of battle.
and his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of olives
which is before Jerusalem on the east and the mount of olives
shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward
the west and there shall be a very great valley and half of
the mountain shall remove toward the north and half of it
toward the south.
and ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains for the
valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal yea ye shall
flee like as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days
of Uzziah king of Judah and the lord my God shall come and
all the saints with thee.
and it shall come to pass in that day that the light shall
not be clear nor dark
but it shall be one day which shall be known to the lord not
day nor night but it shall come to pass that at evening
time it shall be light.
and it shall be in that day that living waters shall go out
from Jerusalem half of them toward the former sea and half
of them toward the hinder sea in summer and in winter shall
it be.
and the lord shall be king over all the earth in that day
shall there be one lord and his name one.
all the land shall be turned as a plain from Geba to Rimmon
south of Jerusalem and it shall be lifted up and inhabited
in her place from Benjamin s gate unto the place of the first
gate unto the corner gate and from the tower of Hananeel
unto the king s winepresses.
and men shall dwell in it and there shall be no more utter
destruction but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.
and this shall be the plague wherewith the lord will smite all
the people that have fought against Jerusalem their flesh
shall consume away while they stand upon their feet and their
eyes shall consume away in their holes and their tongue shall
consume away in their mouth.
and it shall come to pass in that day that a great tumult
from the lord shall be among them and they shall lay hold
every one on the hand of his neighbour and his hand shall
rise up against the hand of his neighbour.
and Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem and the wealth of all
the heathen round about shall be gathered together gold and
Silver and apparel in great abundance.
and so shall be the plague of the horse of the mule of the
camel and of the ass and of all the beasts that shall be in
these tents as this plague.
and it shall come to pass that every one that is left of all
the nations which came against Jerusalem shall even go up from
year to year to worship the king the lord of hosts and to
keep the feast of tabernacles.
and it shall be that whoso will not come up of all the
families of the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the king the
lord of hosts even upon them shall be no rain.
and if the family of Egypt go not up and come not that have
no rain there shall be the plague wherewith the lord will
smite the heathen that come not up to keep the feast of
tabernacles.
this shall be the punishment of Egypt and the punishment of
all nations that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.
in that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses
holiness unto the lord and the pots in the lord s house shall
be like the bowls before the altar.
yea every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness
unto the lord of hosts and all they that sacrifice shall come
and take of them and seethe therein and in that day there
shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the lord of
hosts.
the burden of the word of the lord to Israel by Malachi.
I have loved you saith the lord. yet ye say wherein hast
thou loved us? was not Esau Jacob s brother? saith the lord
yet I loved Jacob
and I hated Esau and laid his mountains and his heritage
waste for the dragons of the wilderness.
whereas Edom saith we are impoverished but we will return
and build the desolate places thus saith the lord of hosts
they shall build but I will throw down and they shall call
them the border of wickedness and the people against whom
the lord hath indignation for ever.
and your eyes shall see and ye shall say the lord will be
magnified from the border of Israel.
a son honoureth his father and a servant his Master if then
I be a father where is mine honour? and if I be a Master
where is my fear? saith the lord of hosts unto you O priests
that despise my name. and ye say wherein have we despised thy
name?
ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar and ye say wherein
have we polluted thee? in that ye say the table of the lord
is contemptible.
and if ye offer the blind for sacrifice is it not evil? and
if ye offer the lame and sick is it not evil? offer it now
unto thy Governor will he be pleased with thee or accept thy
person? saith the lord of hosts.
and now I pray you beseech God that he will be gracious unto
us this hath been by your means will he regard your persons?
saith the lord of hosts.
who is there even among you that would shut the doors for
nought? Neither do ye kindle fire on mine altar for nought. I
have no pleasure in you saith the lord of hosts Neither will
I accept an offering at your hand.
for from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the
same my name shall be great among the Gentiles and in every
place incense shall be offered unto my name and a pure
offering for my name shall be great among the heathen saith
the lord of hosts.
but ye have profaned it in that ye say the table of the lord
is polluted and the fruit thereof even his meat is
contemptible.
ye said also behold what a weariness is it and ye have
snuffed at it saith the lord of hosts and ye brought that
which was torn and the lame and the sick thus ye brought an
offering should I accept this of your hand? saith the lord.
but cursed be the deceiver which hath in his flock a Male
and voweth and sacrificeth unto the lord a corrupt thing for
I Am a great king saith the lord of hosts and my name is
dreadful among the heathen.
and now O ye priests this commandment is for you.
if ye will not hear and if ye will not lay it to heart to
give glory unto my name saith the lord of hosts I will even
send a curse upon you and I will curse your blessings yea I
have cursed them already because ye do not lay it to heart.
behold I will corrupt your seed and spread dung upon your
faces even the dung of your solemn feasts and one shall take
you away with it.
and ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you
that my covenant might be with Levi saith the lord of hosts.
my covenant was with him of life and peace and I gave them to
him for the fear wherewith he feared me and was afraid before
my name.
the law of truth was in his mouth and iniquity was not found
in his lips he walked with me in peace and equity and did
turn many away from iniquity.
for the priest s lips should keep knowledge and they should
seek the law at his mouth for he is the messenger of the lord
of hosts.
but ye are departed out of the way ye have caused many to
stumble at the law ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi
saith the lord of hosts.
therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before
all the people according as ye have not kept my ways but
have been partial in the law.
have we not all one father? hath not one God created us? why
do we deal treacherously every man against his brother by
profaning the covenant of our fathers?
Judah hath dealt treacherously and an abomination is
committed in Israel and in Jerusalem for Judah hath profaned
the holiness of the lord which he loved and hath married the
daughter of a strange God.
the lord will cut off the man that doeth this the Master and
the scholar out of the tabernacles of Jacob and him that
offereth an offering unto the lord of hosts.
and this have ye done again covering the altar of the lord
with tears with weeping and with crying out insomuch that
he regardeth not the offering any more or receiveth it with
good will at your hand.
yet ye say wherefore? because the lord hath been witness
between thee and the wife of thy youth against whom thou hast
dealt treacherously yet is she thy companion and the wife of
thy covenant.
and did not he make one? yet had he the residue of the spirit.
and wherefore one? that he might seek a godly seed. therefore
take heed to your spirit and let none deal treacherously
against the wife of his youth.
for the lord the God of Israel saith that he hateth putting
away for one covereth violence with his garment saith the
lord of hosts therefore take heed to your spirit that ye
deal not treacherously.
ye have wearied the lord with your words. yet ye say wherein
have we wearied him? when ye say every one that doeth evil is
good in the sight of the lord and he delighteth in them or
where is the God of judgment?
behold I will send my messenger and he shall prepare the way
before me and the lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to
his temple even the messenger of the covenant whom ye
delight in behold he shall come saith the lord of hosts.
but who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand
when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner s fire and like
fullers soap
and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of Silver and he
shall purify the sons of Levi and purge them as gold and
Silver that they may offer unto the lord an offering in
righteousness.
then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant
unto the lord as in the days of old and as in former years.
and I will come near to you to judgment and I will be a swift
witness against the sorcerers and against the adulterers and
against false swearers and against those that oppress the
hireling in his wages the widow and the fatherless and that
turn aside the stranger from his right and fear not me saith
the lord of hosts.
for I Am the lord I change not therefore ye sons of Jacob
are not consumed.
even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine
ordinances and have not kept them. return unto me and I will
return unto you saith the lord of hosts. but ye said wherein
shall we return?
will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me. but ye say wherein
have we robbed thee? in tithes and offerings.
ye are cursed with a curse for ye have robbed me even this
whole nation.
bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse that there may be
meat in mine house and prove me now herewith saith the lord
of hosts if I will not open you the windows of heaven and
pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough
to receive it.
and I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes and he shall
not destroy the fruits of your ground Neither shall your vine
cast her fruit before the time in the field saith the lord of
hosts.
and all nations shall call you blessed for ye shall be a
delightsome land saith the lord of hosts.
your words have been stout against me saith the lord. yet ye
say what have we spoken so Much against thee?
ye have said it is vain to serve God and what profit is it
that we have kept his ordinance and that we have walked
mournfully before the lord of hosts?
and now we call the proud happy yea they that work
wickedness are set up yea they that tempt God are even
delivered.
then they that feared the lord spake often one to another and
the lord hearkened and heard it and a book of remembrance
was written before him for them that feared the lord and that
thought upon his name.
and they shall be mine saith the lord of hosts in that day
when I make up my jewels and I will spare them as a man
spareth his own son that serveth him.
then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and
the wicked between him that serveth God and him that serveth
him not.
for behold the day cometh that shall burn as an oven and
all the proud yea and all that do wickedly shall be
stubble and the day that cometh shall burn them up saith the
lord of hosts that it shall leave them Neither root nor
branch.
but unto you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness
Arise with healing in his wings and ye shall go forth and
grow up as calves of the stall.
and ye shall tread down the wicked for they shall be ashes
under the soles of your feet in the day that I shall do this
saith the lord of hosts.
remember ye the law of Moses my servant which I commanded
unto him in Horeb for all Israel with the statutes and
judgments.
behold I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming
of the great and dreadful day of the lord
and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children
and the heart of the children to their fathers lest I come
and smite the earth with a curse.
the book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of David
the son of Abraham.
Abraham begat Isaac and Isaac begat Jacob and Jacob begat
Judas and his brethren
and Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar and Phares begat
Esrom and Esrom begat Aram
and Aram begat Aminadab and Aminadab begat Naasson and
Naasson begat Salmon
and Salmon begat Booz of Rachab and Booz begat Obed of Ruth
and Obed begat Jesse
and Jesse begat David the king and David the king begat
Solomon of her that had been the wife of Urias
and Solomon begat Roboam and Roboam begat Abia and Abia
begat Asa
and Asa begat Josaphat and Josaphat begat Joram and Joram
begat Ozias
and Ozias begat Joatham and Joatham begat Achaz and Achaz
begat Ezekias
and Ezekias begat Manasses and Manasses begat Amon and Amon
begat Josias
and Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren about the time
they were carried away to Babylon
and after they were brought to Babylon Jechonias begat
Salathiel and Salathiel begat Zorobabel
and Zorobabel begat Abiud and Abiud begat Eliakim and
Eliakim begat Azor
and Azor begat Sadoc and Sadoc begat Achim and Achim begat
Eliud
and Eliud begat Eleazar and Eleazar begat Matthan and
Matthan begat Jacob
and Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary of whom was born
Jesus who is called Christ.
so all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen
generations and from David until the carrying away into
Babylon are fourteen generations and from the carrying away
into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations.
now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise when as his
mother Mary was espoused to Joseph before they came together
she was found with child of the holy ghost.
then Joseph her husband being a just man and not willing to
make her a publick example was minded to put her away
privily.
but while he thought on these things behold the angel of the
lord appeared unto him in a dream saying Joseph thou son of
David fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife for that
which is conceived in her is of the holy ghost.
and she shall bring forth a son and thou shalt call his name
Jesus for he shall save his people from their sins.
now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the lord by the prophet saying
behold a virgin shall be with child and shall bring forth a
son and they shall call his name Emmanuel which being
interpreted is God with us.
then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the
lord had bidden him and took unto him his wife
and knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son
and he called his name Jesus.
now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of
Herod the king behold there came wise men from the east to
Jerusalem
saying where is he that is born king of the Jews? for we have
seen his star in the east and are come to worship him.
when Herod the king had heard these things he was troubled
and all Jerusalem with him.
and when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of
the people together he demanded of them where Christ should
be born.
and they said unto him in Bethlehem of Judaea for thus it is
written by the prophet
and thou Bethlehem in the land of Juda art not the least
among the princes of Juda for out of thee shall come a
Governor that shall rule my people Israel.
then Herod when he had privily called the wise men enquired
of them diligently what time the star appeared.
and he sent them to Bethlehem and said go and search
diligently for the young child and when ye have found him
bring me word again that I may come and worship him also.
when they had heard the king they departed and lo the
star which they saw in the east went before them till it
came and stood over where the young child was.
when they saw the star they rejoiced with exceeding great
joy.
and when they were come into the house they saw the young
child with Mary his mother and fell down and worshipped him
and when they had opened their treasures they presented unto
him gifts gold and frankincense and myrrh.
and being warned of God in a dream that they should not return
to Herod they departed into their own country another way.
and when they were departed behold the angel of the lord
appeareth to Joseph in a dream saying Arise and take the
young child and his mother and flee into Egypt and be thou
there until I bring thee word for Herod will seek the young
child to destroy him.
when he arose he took the young child and his mother by
night and departed into Egypt
and was there until the death of Herod that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken of the lord by the prophet saying
out of Egypt have I called my son.
then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men
was exceeding wroth and sent forth and slew all the children
that were in Bethlehem and in all the coasts thereof from
two years old and under according to the time which he had
diligently enquired of the wise men.
then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the
prophet saying
in Rama was there a voice heard lamentation and weeping and
great mourning Rachel weeping for her children and would not
be comforted because they are not.
but when Herod was dead behold an angel of the lord
appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt
saying Arise and take the young child and his mother and go
into the land of Israel for they are dead which sought the
young child s life.
and he arose and took the young child and his mother and
came into the land of Israel.
but when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judaea in the
room of his father Herod he was afraid to go thither
notwithstanding being warned of God in a dream he turned
aside into the parts of Galilee
and he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth that it might
be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets he shall be
called a Nazarene.
in those days came John the Baptist preaching in the
wilderness of Judaea
and saying repent ye for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
for this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias
saying the voice of one crying in the wilderness prepare ye
the way of the lord make his paths straight.
and the same John had his raiment of camel s hair and a
leathern girdle about his loins and his meat was locusts and
wild honey.
then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judaea and all the
region round about Jordan
and were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins.
but when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to
his baptism he said unto them O generation of vipers who
hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance
and think not to say within yourselves we have Abraham to our
father for I say unto you that God is able of these stones
to raise up children unto Abraham.
and now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees
therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is
hewn down and cast into the fire.
I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance but he that
cometh after me is mightier than I whose shoes I Am not
worthy to bear he shall baptize you with the holy ghost and
with fire
whose fan is in his hand and he will throughly purge his
floor and gather his wheat into the garner but he will burn
up the chaff with unquenchable fire.
then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be
baptized of him.
but John forbad him saying I have need to be baptized of
thee and comest thou to me?
and Jesus answering said unto him suffer it to be so now for
thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. then he
suffered him.
and Jesus when he was baptized went up straightway out of
the water and lo the heavens were opened unto him and he
saw the spirit of God descending like a dove and lighting
upon him
and lo a voice from heaven saying this is my beloved son in
whom I Am well pleased.
then was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be
tempted of the devil.
and when he had fasted forty days and forty nights he was
afterward an hungred.
and when the tempter came to him he said if thou be the son
of God command that these stones be made bread.
but he answered and said it is written man shall not live by
bread alone but by every word that proceedeth out of the
mouth of God.
then the devil taketh him up into the holy city and setteth
him on a pinnacle of the temple
and saith unto him if thou be the son of God cast thyself
down for it is written he shall give his angels charge
concerning thee and in their hands they shall bear thee up
lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Jesus said unto him it is written again thou shalt not tempt
the lord thy God.
again the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high
mountain and sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world and
the glory of them
and saith unto him all these things will I give thee if thou
wilt fall down and worship me.
then saith Jesus unto him get thee hence Satan for it is
written thou shalt worship the lord thy God and him only
shalt thou serve.
then the devil leaveth him and behold angels came and
ministered unto him.
now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison he
departed into Galilee
and leaving Nazareth he came and dwelt in Capernaum which is
upon the sea coast in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the
prophet saying
the land of Zabulon and the land of Nephthalim by the way of
the sea beyond Jordan Galilee of the Gentiles
the people which sat in darkness saw great light and to them
which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung
up.
from that time Jesus began to preach and to say repent for
the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
and Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee saw two brethren
Simon called Peter and Andrew his brother casting a net into
the sea for they were fishers.
and he saith unto them follow me and I will make you fishers
of men.
and they straightway left their nets and followed him.
and going on from thence he saw other two brethren James the
son of Zebedee and John his brother in a ship with Zebedee
their father mending their nets and he called them.
and they Immediately left the ship and their father and
followed him.
and Jesus went about all Galilee teaching in their
synagogues and preaching the gospel of the kingdom and
healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among
the people.
and his fame went throughout all Syria and they brought unto
him all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and
torments and those which were possessed with devils and
those which were lunatick and those that had the palsy and
he healed them.
and there followed him great multitudes of people from
Galilee and from Decapolis and from Jerusalem and from
Judaea and from beyond Jordan.
and seeing the multitudes he went up into a mountain and
when he was set his disciples came unto him
and he opened his mouth and taught them saying
blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.
blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted.
blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth.
blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness for they shall be filled.
blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy.
blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God.
blessed are the peacemakers for they shall be called the
children of God.
blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
sake.
rejoice and be exceeding glad for great is your reward in
heaven for so persecuted they the prophets which were before
you.
ye are the salt of the earth but if the salt have lost his
savour wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good
for nothing but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot
of men.
ye are the light of the world. a city that is set on an hill
cannot be hid.
Neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel but
on a candlestick and it giveth light unto all that are in the
house.
let your light so shine before men that they may see your
good works and glorify your father which is in heaven.
think not that I Am come to destroy the law or the prophets
I Am not come to destroy but to fulfil.
for verily I say unto you till heaven and earth pass one jot
or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till all be
fulfilled.
whosoever therefore shall break one of these least
commandments and shall teach men so he shall be called the
least in the kingdom of heaven but whosoever shall do and
teach them the same shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven.
for I say unto you that except your righteousness shall
exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees ye
shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.
ye have heard that it was said of them of old time thou shalt
not kill and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the
judgment
but I say unto you that whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment and
whosoever shall say to his brother Raca shall be in danger
of the council but whosoever shall say thou fool shall be
in danger of hell fire.
therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar and there
rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee
leave there thy gift before the altar and go thy way first
be reconciled to thy brother and then come and offer thy
gift.
agree with thine adversary quickly whiles thou art in the way
with him lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the
judge and the judge deliver thee to the officer and thou be
cast into prison.
verily I say unto thee thou shalt by no means come out
thence till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.
ye have heard that it was said by them of old time thou shalt
not commit adultery
but I say unto you that whosoever looketh on a woman to lust
after her hath committed adultery with her already in his
heart.
and if thy right eye offend thee pluck it out and cast it
from thee for it is profitable for thee that one of thy
members should perish and not that thy whole body should be
cast into hell.
and if thy right hand offend thee cut it off and cast it
from thee for it is profitable for thee that one of thy
members should perish and not that thy whole body should be
cast into hell.
it hath been said whosoever shall put away his wife let him
give her a writing of divorcement
but I say unto you that whosoever shall put away his wife
saving for the cause of fornication causeth her to commit
adultery and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced
committeth adultery.
again ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old
time thou shalt not forswear thyself but shalt perform unto
the lord thine oaths
but I say unto you swear not at all Neither by heaven for
it is God s throne
nor by the earth for it is his footstool Neither by
Jerusalem for it is the city of the great king.
Neither shalt thou swear by thy head because thou canst not
make one hair white or black.
but let your communication be yea yea nay nay for
whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.
ye have heard that it hath been said an eye for an eye and a
tooth for a tooth
but I say unto you that ye resist not evil but whosoever
shall smite thee on thy right cheek turn to him the other
also.
and if any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy
coat let him have thy cloak also.
and whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile go with him
twain.
give to him that asketh thee and from him that would borrow
of thee turn not thou away.
ye have heard that it hath been said thou shalt love thy
neighbour and hate thine enemy.
but I say unto you love your enemies bless them that curse
you do good to them that hate you and pray for them which
despitefully use you and persecute you
that ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven
for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good and
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.
for if ye love them which love you what reward have ye? do
not even the publicans the same?
and if ye salute your brethren only what do ye more than
others? do not even the publicans so?
be ye therefore perfect even as your father which is in
heaven is perfect.
take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of
them otherwise ye have no reward of your father which is in
heaven.
therefore when thou doest thine alms do not sound a trumpet
before thee as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the
streets that they may have glory of men. verily I say unto
you they have their reward.
but when thou doest alms let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand doeth
that thine alms may be in secret and thy father which seeth
in secret himself shall reward thee openly.
and when thou prayest thou shalt not be as the hypocrites
are for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in
the corners of the streets that they may be seen of men.
verily I say unto you they have their reward.
but thou when thou prayest enter into thy closet and when
thou hast shut thy door pray to thy father which is in
secret and thy father which seeth in secret shall reward thee
openly.
but when ye pray use not vain repetitions as the heathen do
for they think that they shall be heard for their Much
speaking.
be not ye therefore like unto them for your father knoweth
what things ye have need of before ye ask him.
after this manner therefore pray ye our father which art in
heaven hallowed be thy name.
thy kingdom come thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven.
give us this day our daily bread.
and forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors.
and lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil for
thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory for ever.
Amen.
for if ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly father
will also forgive you
but if ye forgive not men their trespasses Neither will your
father forgive your trespasses.
moreover when ye fast be not as the hypocrites of a sad
countenance for they disfigure their faces that they may
appear unto men to fast. verily I say unto you they have
their reward.
but thou when thou fastest anoint thine head and wash thy
face
that thou appear not unto men to fast but unto thy father
which is in secret and thy father which seeth in secret
shall reward thee openly.
lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth where moth and
rust doth corrupt and where thieves break through and steal
but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven where Neither
moth nor rust doth corrupt and where thieves do not break
through nor steal
for where your treasure is there will your heart be also.
the light of the body is the eye if therefore thine eye be
single thy whole body shall be full of light.
but if thine eye be evil thy whole body shall be full of
darkness. if therefore the light that is in thee be darkness
how great is that darkness
no man can serve two masters for either he will hate the one
and love the other or else he will hold to the one and
despise the other. ye cannot serve God and mammon.
therefore I say unto you take no thought for your life what
ye shall eat or what ye shall drink nor yet for your body
what ye shall put on. is not the life more than meat and the
body than raiment?
behold the fowls of the air for they sow not Neither do they
reap nor gather into barns yet your heavenly father feedeth
them. are ye not Much better than they?
which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his
stature?
and why take ye thought for raiment? consider the lilies of
the field how they grow they toil not Neither do they spin
and yet I say unto you that even Solomon in all his glory was
not arrayed like one of these.
wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field which to
day is and to morrow is cast into the oven shall he not Much
more clothe you O ye of little faith?
therefore take no thought saying what shall we eat? or what
shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed?
 for after all these things do the Gentiles seek for your
heavenly father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.
but seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness
and all these things shall be added unto you.
take therefore no thought for the morrow for the morrow shall
take thought for the things of itself. sufficient unto the day
is the evil thereof.
judge not that ye be not judged.
for with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged and with
what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again.
and why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother s eye
but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
or how wilt thou say to thy brother let me pull out the mote
out of thine eye and behold a beam is in thine own eye?
thou hypocrite first cast out the beam out of thine own eye
and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of
thy brother s eye.
give not that which is holy unto the dogs Neither cast ye
your pearls before swine lest they trample them under their
feet and turn again and rend you.
ask and it shall be given you seek and ye shall find
knock and it shall be opened unto you
for every one that asketh receiveth and he that seeketh
findeth and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.
or what man is there of you whom if his son ask bread will
he give him a stone?
or if he ask a fish will he give him a serpent?
if ye then being evil know how to give good gifts unto your
children how Much more shall your father which is in heaven
give good things to them that ask him?
therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you do ye even so to them for this is the law and the
prophets.
enter ye in at the strait gate for wide is the gate and
broad is the way that leadeth to destruction and many there
be which go in thereat
because strait is the gate and narrow is the way which
leadeth unto life and few there be that find it.
beware of false prophets which come to you in sheep s
clothing but inwardly they are ravening wolves.
ye shall know them by their fruits. do men gather grapes of
thorns or figs of thistles?
even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit but a
corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.
a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit Neither can a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.
every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down
and cast into the fire.
wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.
not every one that saith unto me lord lord shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven but he that doeth the will of my father
which is in heaven.
many will say to me in that day lord lord have we not
prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils?
and in thy name done many wonderful works?
and then will I profess unto them I never knew you depart
from me ye that work iniquity.
therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine and doeth
them I will liken him unto a wise man which built his house
upon a rock
and the rain descended and the floods came and the winds
blew and beat upon that house and it fell not for it was
founded upon a rock.
and every one that heareth these sayings of mine and doeth
them not shall be likened unto a foolish man which built his
house upon the sand
and the rain descended and the floods came and the winds
blew and beat upon that house and it fell and great was the
fall of it.
and it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings the
people were astonished at his doctrine
for he taught them as one having authority and not as the
scribes.
when he was come down from the mountain great multitudes
followed him.
and behold there came a leper and worshipped him saying
lord if thou wilt thou canst make me clean.
and Jesus put forth his hand and touched him saying I will
be thou clean. and Immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
and Jesus saith unto him see thou tell no man but go thy
way shew thyself to the priest and offer the gift that Moses
commanded for a testimony unto them.
and when Jesus was entered into Capernaum there came unto him
a centurion beseeching him
and saying lord my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy
grievously tormented.
and Jesus saith unto him I will come and heal him.
the centurion answered and said lord I Am not worthy that
thou shouldest come under my roof but speak the word only
and my servant shall be healed.
for I Am a man under authority having soldiers under me and
I say to this man go and he goeth and to another come and
he cometh and to my servant do this and he doeth it.
when Jesus heard it he marvelled and said to them that
followed verily I say unto you I have not found so great
faith no not in Israel.
and I say unto you that many shall come from the east and
west and shall sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob
in the kingdom of heaven.
but the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer
darkness there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
and Jesus said unto the centurion go thy way and as thou
hast believed so be it done unto thee. and his servant was
healed in the selfsame hour.
and when Jesus was come into Peter s house he saw his wife s
mother laid and sick of a fever.
and he touched her hand and the fever left her and she
arose and ministered unto them.
when the even was come they brought unto him many that were
possessed with devils and he cast out the spirits with his
word and healed all that were sick
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the
prophet saying himself took our infirmities and bare our
sicknesses.
now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him he gave
commandment to depart unto the other side.
and a certain scribe came and said unto him Master I will
follow thee whithersoever thou goest.
and Jesus saith unto him the foxes have holes and the birds
of the air have nests but the son of man hath not where to
lay his head.
and another of his disciples said unto him lord suffer me
first to go and bury my father.
but Jesus said unto him follow me and let the dead bury
their dead.
and when he was entered into a ship his disciples followed
him.
and behold there arose a great tempest in the sea insomuch
that the ship was covered with the waves but he was asleep.
and his disciples came to him and awoke him saying lord
save us we perish.
and he saith unto them why are ye fearful O ye of little
faith? then he arose and rebuked the winds and the sea and
there was a great calm.
but the men marvelled saying what manner of man is this
that even the winds and the sea obey him
and when he was come to the other side into the country of the
Gergesenes there met him two possessed with devils coming
out of the tombs exceeding fierce so that no man might pass
by that way.
and behold they cried out saying what have we to do with
thee Jesus thou son of God? art thou come hither to torment
us before the time?
and there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine
feeding.
so the devils besought him saying if thou cast us out
suffer us to go away into the herd of swine.
and he said unto them go. and when they were come out they
went into the herd of swine and behold the whole herd of
swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea and
perished in the waters.
and they that kept them fled and went their ways into the
city and told every thing and what was befallen to the
possessed of the devils.
and behold the whole city came out to meet Jesus and when
they saw him they besought him that he would depart out of
their coasts.
and he entered into a ship and passed over and came into his
own city.
and behold they brought to him a man sick of the palsy
lying on a bed and Jesus seeing their faith said unto the
sick of the palsy son be of good cheer thy sins be forgiven
thee.
and behold certain of the scribes said within themselves
this man blasphemeth.
and Jesus knowing their thoughts said wherefore think ye evil
in your hearts?
for whether is easier to say thy sins be forgiven thee or
to say Arise and walk?
but that ye may know that the son of man hath power on earth
to forgive sins then saith he to the sick of the palsy
Arise take up thy bed and go unto thine house.
and he arose and departed to his house.
but when the multitudes saw it they marvelled and glorified
God which had given such power unto men.
and as Jesus passed forth from thence he saw a man named
Matthew sitting at the receipt of custom and he saith unto
him follow me. and he arose and followed him.
and it came to pass as Jesus sat at meat in the house
behold many publicans and sinners came and sat down with him
and his disciples.
and when the Pharisees saw it they said unto his disciples
why eateth your Master with publicans and sinners?
but when Jesus heard that he said unto them they that be
whole need not a Physician but they that are sick.
but go ye and learn what that meaneth I will have mercy and
not sacrifice for I Am not come to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance.
then came to him the disciples of John saying why do we and
the Pharisees fast oft but thy disciples fast not?
and Jesus said unto them can the children of the bridechamber
mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? but the days
will come when the bridegroom shall be taken from them and
then shall they fast.
no man putteth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment for
that which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment
and the rent is made worse.
Neither do men put new wine into old bottles else the bottles
break and the wine runneth out and the bottles perish but
they put new wine into new bottles and both are preserved.
while he spake these things unto them behold there came a
certain ruler and worshipped him saying my daughter is even
now dead but come and lay thy hand upon her and she shall
live.
and Jesus arose and followed him and so did his disciples.
and behold a woman which was diseased with an issue of
blood twelve years came behind him and touched the hem of
his garment
for she said within herself if I may but touch his garment I
shall be whole.
but Jesus turned him about and when he saw her he said
daughter be of good comfort thy faith hath made thee whole.
and the woman was made whole from that hour.
and when Jesus came into the ruler s house and saw the
minstrels and the people making a noise
he said unto them give place for the maid is not dead but
sleepeth. and they laughed him to scorn.
but when the people were put forth he went in and took her
by the hand and the maid arose.
and the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.
and when Jesus departed thence two blind men followed him
crying and saying thou son of David have mercy on us.
and when he was come into the house the blind men came to
him and Jesus saith unto them believe ye that I Am able to
do this? they said unto him yea lord.
then touched he their eyes saying according to your faith be
it unto you.
and their eyes were opened and Jesus straitly charged them
saying see that no man know it.
but they when they were departed spread abroad his fame in
all that country.
as they went out behold they brought to him a dumb man
possessed with a devil.
and when the devil was cast out the dumb spake and the
multitudes marvelled saying it was never so seen in Israel.
but the Pharisees said he casteth out devils through the
prince of the devils.
and Jesus went about all the cities and villages teaching in
their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the kingdom and
healing every sickness and every disease among the people.
but when he saw the multitudes he was moved with compassion
on them because they fainted and were scattered abroad as
sheep having no Shepherd.
then saith he unto his disciples the harvest truly is
plenteous but the labourers are few
pray ye therefore the lord of the harvest that he will send
forth labourers into his harvest.
and when he had called unto him his twelve disciples he gave
them power against unclean spirits to cast them out and to
heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease.
now the names of the twelve apostles are these the first
Simon who is called Peter and Andrew his brother James the
son of Zebedee and John his brother
Philip and Bartholomew Thomas and Matthew the publican
James the son of Alphaeus and Lebbaeus whose surname was
Thaddaeus
Simon the Canaanite and Judas Iscariot who also betrayed
him.
these twelve Jesus sent forth and commanded them saying go
not into the way of the Gentiles and into any city of the
Samaritans enter ye not
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
and as ye go preach saying the kingdom of heaven is at
hand.
heal the sick cleanse the lepers raise the dead cast out
devils freely ye have received freely give.
provide Neither gold nor Silver nor brass in your purses
nor scrip for your journey Neither two coats Neither shoes
nor yet staves for the workman is worthy of his meat.
and into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter enquire who
in it is worthy and there abide till ye go thence.
and when ye come into an house salute it.
and if the house be worthy let your peace come upon it but
if it be not worthy let your peace return to you.
and whosoever shall not receive you nor hear your words when
ye depart out of that house or city shake off the dust of
your feet.
verily I say unto you it shall be more tolerable for the land
of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment than for that
city.
behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves be
ye therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves.
but beware of men for they will deliver you up to the
councils and they will scourge you in their synagogues
and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my
sake for a testimony against them and the Gentiles.
but when they deliver you up take no thought how or what ye
shall speak for it shall be given you in that same hour what
ye shall speak.
for it is not ye that speak but the spirit of your father
which speaketh in you.
and the brother shall deliver up the brother to death and the
father the child and the children shall rise up against their
parents and cause them to be put to death.
and ye shall be hated of all men for my name s sake but he
that endureth to the end shall be saved.
but when they persecute you in this city flee ye into
another for verily I say unto you ye shall not have gone
over the cities of Israel till the son of man be come.
the disciple is not above his Master nor the servant above
his lord.
it is enough for the disciple that he be as his Master and
the servant as his lord. if they have called the Master of the
house Beelzebub how Much more shall they call them of his
household?
fear them not therefore for there is nothing covered that
shall not be revealed and hid that shall not be known.
what I tell you in darkness that speak ye in light and what
ye hear in the ear that preach ye upon the housetops.
and fear not them which kill the body but are not able to
kill the soul but rather fear him which is able to destroy
both soul and body in hell.
are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them
shall not fall on the ground without your father.
but the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
fear ye not therefore ye are of more value than many
sparrows.
whosoever therefore shall confess me before men him will I
confess also before my father which is in heaven.
but whosoever shall deny me before men him will I also deny
before my father which is in heaven.
think not that I Am come to send peace on earth I came not to
send peace but a sword.
for I Am come to set a man at variance against his father and
the daughter against her mother and the daughter in law
against her mother in law.
and a man s foes shall be they of his own household.
he that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of
me and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not
worthy of me.
and he that taketh not his cross and followeth after me is
not worthy of me.
he that findeth his life shall lose it and he that loseth his
life for my sake shall find it.
he that receiveth you receiveth me and he that receiveth me
receiveth him that sent me.
he that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall
receive a prophet s reward and he that receiveth a righteous
man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous
man s reward.
and whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little
ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple
verily I say unto you he shall in no wise lose his reward.
and it came to pass when Jesus had made an end of commanding
his twelve disciples he departed thence to teach and to
preach in their cities.
now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ he
sent two of his disciples
and said unto him art thou he that should come or do we look
for another?
Jesus answered and said unto them go and shew John again
those things which ye do hear and see
the blind receive their sight and the lame walk the lepers
are cleansed and the deaf hear the dead are raised up and
the poor have the gospel preached to them.
and blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.
and as they departed Jesus began to say unto the multitudes
concerning John what went ye out into the wilderness to see?
a reed shaken with the wind?
but what went ye out for to see? a man clothed in soft
raiment? behold they that wear soft clothing are in kings
houses.
but what went ye out for to see? a prophet? yea I say unto
you and more than a prophet.
for this is he of whom it is written behold I send my
messenger before thy face which shall prepare thy way before
thee.
verily I say unto you among them that are born of women there
hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist
notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is
greater than he.
and from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence and the violent take it by force.
for all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.
and if ye will receive it this is Elias which was for to
come.
he that hath ears to hear let him hear.
but whereunto shall I liken this generation? it is like unto
children sitting in the markets and calling unto their
fellows
and saying we have piped unto you and ye have not danced we
have mourned unto you and ye have not lamented.
for John came Neither eating nor drinking and they say he
hath a devil.
the son of man came eating and drinking and they say behold
a man gluttonous and a winebibber a friend of publicans and
sinners. but wisdom is justified of her children.
then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his Mighty
works were done because they repented not
woe unto thee Chorazin woe unto thee Bethsaida for if the
Mighty works which were done in you had been done in Tyre
and Sidon they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and
ashes.
but I say unto you it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and
Sidon at the day of judgment than for you.
and thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven shalt be
brought down to hell for if the Mighty works which have been
done in thee had been done in Sodom it would have remained
until this day.
but I say unto you that it shall be more tolerable for the
land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee.
at that time Jesus answered and said I thank thee O father
lord of heaven and earth because thou hast hid these things
from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto babes.
even so father for so it seemed good in thy sight.
all things are delivered unto me of my father and no man
knoweth the son but the father Neither knoweth any man the
father save the son and he to whomsoever the son will reveal
him.
come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden and I
will give you rest.
take my yoke upon you and learn of me for I Am meek and
lowly in heart and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
for my yoke is easy and my burden is light.
at that time Jesus went on the sabbath day through the corn
and his disciples were an hungred and began to pluck the ears
of corn and to eat.
but when the Pharisees saw it they said unto him behold thy
disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath
day.
but he said unto them have ye not read what David did when
he was an hungred and they that were with him
how he entered into the house of God and did eat the
shewbread which was not lawful for him to eat Neither for
them which were with him but only for the priests?
or have ye not read in the law how that on the sabbath days
the priests in the temple profane the sabbath and are
blameless?
but I say unto you that in this place is one greater than the
temple.
but if ye had known what this meaneth I will have mercy and
not sacrifice ye would not have condemned the guiltless.
for the son of man is lord even of the sabbath day.
and when he was departed thence he went into their synagogue
and behold there was a man which had his hand withered. and
they asked him saying is it lawful to heal on the sabbath
days? that they might accuse him.
and he said unto them what man shall there be among you that
shall have one sheep and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath
day will he not lay hold on it and lift it out?
how Much then is a man better than a sheep? wherefore it is
lawful to do well on the sabbath days.
then saith he to the man stretch forth thine hand. and he
stretched it forth and it was restored whole like as the
other.
then the Pharisees went out and held a council against him
how they might destroy him.
but when Jesus knew it he withdrew himself from thence and
great multitudes followed him and he healed them all
and charged them that they should not make him known
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the
prophet saying
behold my servant whom I have chosen my beloved in whom my
soul is well pleased I will put my spirit upon him and he
shall shew judgment to the Gentiles.
he shall not strive nor cry Neither shall any man hear his
voice in the streets.
a bruised reed shall he not break and smoking flax shall he
not quench till he send forth judgment unto victory.
and in his name shall the Gentiles trust.
then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil blind
and dumb and he healed him insomuch that the blind and dumb
both spake and saw.
and all the people were amazed and said is not this the son
of David?
but when the Pharisees heard it they said this fellow doth
not cast out devils but by Beelzebub the prince of the
devils.
and Jesus knew their thoughts and said unto them every
kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation and
every city or house divided against itself shall not stand
and if Satan cast out Satan he is divided against himself
how shall then his kingdom stand?
and if I by Beelzebub cast out devils by whom do your
children cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges.
but if I cast out devils by the spirit of God then the
kingdom of God is come unto you.
or else how can one enter into a strong man s house and spoil
his goods except he first bind the strong man? and then he
will spoil his house.
he that is not with me is against me and he that gathereth
not with me scattereth abroad.
wherefore I say unto you all manner of Sin and blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men but the blasphemy against the holy
ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.
and whosoever speaketh a word against the son of man it shall
be forgiven him but whosoever speaketh against the holy
ghost it shall not be forgiven him Neither in this world
Neither in the world to come.
either make the tree good and his fruit good or else make
the tree corrupt and his fruit corrupt for the tree is known
by his fruit.
O generation of vipers how can ye being evil speak good
things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaketh.
a good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth
forth good things and an evil man out of the evil treasure
bringeth forth evil things.
but I say unto you that every idle word that men shall speak
they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.
for by thy words thou shalt be justified and by thy words
thou shalt be condemned.
then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered
saying Master we would see a sign from thee.
but he answered and said unto them an evil and adulterous
generation seeketh after a sign and there shall no sign be
given to it but the sign of the prophet Jonas
for as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale s
belly so shall the son of man be three days and three nights
in the heart of the earth.
the men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this
generation and shall condemn it because they repented at the
preaching of Jonas and behold a greater than Jonas is here.
the queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this
generation and shall condemn it for she came from the
uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon
and behold a greater than Solomon is here.
when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man he walketh
through dry places seeking rest and findeth none.
then he saith I will return into my house from whence I came
out and when he is come he findeth it empty swept and
garnished.
then goeth he and taketh with himself seven other spirits
more wicked than himself and they enter in and dwell there
and the last state of that man is worse than the first. even
so shall it be also unto this wicked generation.
while he yet talked to the people behold his mother and his
brethren stood without desiring to speak with him.
then one said unto him behold thy mother and thy brethren
stand without desiring to speak with thee.
but he answered and said unto him that told him who is my
mother? and who are my brethren?
and he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples and
said behold my mother and my brethren
for whosoever shall do the will of my father which is in
heaven the same is my brother and sister and mother.
the same day went Jesus out of the house and sat by the sea
side.
and great multitudes were gathered together unto him so that
he went into a ship and sat and the whole multitude stood on
the shore.
and he spake many things unto them in parables saying
behold a sower went forth to sow
and when he sowed some seeds fell by the way side and the
fowls came and devoured them up
some fell upon stony places where they had not Much earth
and forthwith they sprung up because they had no deepness of
earth
and when the sun was up they were scorched and because they
had no root they withered away.
and some fell among thorns and the thorns sprung up and
choked them
but other fell into good ground and brought forth fruit some
an hundredfold some sixtyfold some thirtyfold.
who hath ears to hear let him hear.
and the disciples came and said unto him why speakest thou
unto them in parables?
he answered and said unto them because it is given unto you
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven but to them it
is not given.
for whosoever hath to him shall be given and he shall have
more abundance but whosoever hath not from him shall be
taken away even that he hath.
therefore speak I to them in parables because they seeing see
not and hearing they hear not Neither do they understand.
and in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias which saith
by hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand and seeing
ye shall see and shall not perceive
for this people s heart is waxed gross and their ears are
dull of hearing and their eyes they have closed lest at any
time they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears
and should understand with their heart and should be
converted and I should heal them.
but blessed are your eyes for they see and your ears for
they hear.
for verily I say unto you that many prophets and righteous
men have desired to see those things which ye see and have
not seen them and to hear those things which ye hear and
have not heard them.
hear ye therefore the parable of the sower.
when any one heareth the word of the kingdom and
understandeth it not then cometh the wicked one and catcheth
away that which was sown in his heart. this is he which
received seed by the way side.
but he that received the seed into stony places the same is
he that heareth the word and anon with joy receiveth it
yet hath he not root in himself but dureth for a while for
when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word
by and by he is offended.
he also that received seed among the thorns is he that heareth
the word and the care of this world and the deceitfulness of
Riches choke the word and he becometh unfruitful.
but he that received seed into the good ground is he that
heareth the word and understandeth it which also beareth
fruit and bringeth forth some an hundredfold some sixty
some thirty.
another parable put he forth unto them saying the kingdom of
heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his
field
but while men slept his enemy came and sowed tares among the
wheat and went his way.
but when the blade was sprung up and brought forth fruit
then appeared the tares also.
so the servants of the householder came and said unto him
Sir didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence
then hath it tares?
he said unto them an enemy hath done this. the servants said
unto him wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?
but he said nay lest while ye gather up the tares ye root
up also the wheat with them.
let both grow together until the harvest and in the time of
harvest I will say to the reapers gather ye together first
the tares and bind them in bundles to burn them but gather
the wheat into my barn.
another parable put he forth unto them saying the kingdom of
heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed which a man took
and sowed in his field
which indeed is the least of all seeds but when it is grown
it is the greatest among herbs and becometh a tree so that
the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.
another parable spake he unto them the kingdom of heaven is
like unto leaven which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal till the whole was leavened.
all these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables
and without a parable spake he not unto them
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet
saying I will open my mouth in parables I will utter things
which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world.
then Jesus sent the multitude away and went into the house
and his disciples came unto him saying declare unto us the
parable of the tares of the field.
he answered and said unto them he that soweth the good seed
is the son of man
the field is the world the good seed are the children of the
kingdom but the tares are the children of the wicked one
the enemy that sowed them is the devil the harvest is the end
of the world and the reapers are the angels.
as therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire so
shall it be in the end of this world.
the son of man shall send forth his angels and they shall
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend and them
which do iniquity
and shall cast them into a furnace of fire there shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth.
then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom
of their father. who hath ears to hear let him hear.
again the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a
field the which when a man hath found he hideth and for joy
thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath and buyeth that
field.
again the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man
seeking goodly pearls
who when he had found one pearl of great price went and sold
all that he had and bought it.
again the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net that was cast
into the sea and gathered of every kind
which when it was full they drew to shore and sat down and
gathered the good into vessels but cast the bad away.
so shall it be at the end of the world the angels shall come
forth and sever the wicked from among the just
and shall cast them into the furnace of fire there shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth.
Jesus saith unto them have ye understood all these things?
they say unto him yea lord.
then said he unto them therefore every scribe which is
instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that
is an householder which bringeth forth out of his treasure
things new and old.
and it came to pass that when Jesus had finished these
parables he departed thence.
and when he was come into his own country he taught them in
their synagogue insomuch that they were astonished and said
whence hath this man this wisdom and these Mighty works?
is not this the carpenter s son? is not his mother called
Mary? and his brethren James and Joses and Simon and
Judas?
and his sisters are they not all with us? whence then hath
this man all these things?
and they were offended in him. but Jesus said unto them a
prophet is not without honour save in his own country and in
his own house.
and he did not many Mighty works there because of their
unbelief.
at that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus
and said unto his servants this is John the Baptist he is
risen from the dead and therefore Mighty works do shew forth
themselves in him.
for Herod had laid hold on John and bound him and put him in
prison for Herodias sake his brother Philip s wife.
for John said unto him it is not lawful for thee to have her.
and when he would have put him to death he feared the
multitude because they counted him as a prophet.
but when Herod s birthday was kept the daughter of Herodias
danced before them and pleased Herod.
whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she
would ask.
and she being before instructed of her mother said give me
here John Baptist s head in a charger.
and the king was sorry nevertheless for the oath s sake and
them which sat with him at meat he commanded it to be given
her.
and he sent and beheaded John in the prison.
and his head was brought in a charger and given to the
damsel and she brought it to her mother.
and his disciples came and took up the body and buried it
and went and told Jesus.
when Jesus heard of it he departed thence by ship into a
desert place apart and when the people had heard thereof
they followed him on foot out of the cities.
and Jesus went forth and saw a great multitude and was moved
with compassion toward them and he healed their sick.
and when it was evening his disciples came to him saying
this is a desert place and the time is now past send the
multitude away that they may go into the villages and buy
themselves victuals.
but Jesus said unto them they need not depart give ye them
to eat.
and they say unto him we have here but five loaves and two
fishes.
he said bring them hither to me.
and he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass and
took the five loaves and the two fishes and looking up to
heaven he blessed and brake and gave the loaves to his
disciples and the disciples to the multitude.
and they did all eat and were filled and they took up of the
fragments that remained twelve baskets full.
and they that had eaten were about five thousand men beside
women and children.
and straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a
ship and to go before him unto the other side while he sent
the multitudes away.
and when he had sent the multitudes away he went up into a
mountain apart to pray and when the evening was come he was
there alone.
but the ship was now in the midst of the sea tossed with
waves for the wind was contrary.
and in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them
walking on the sea.
and when the disciples saw him walking on the sea they were
troubled saying it is a spirit and they cried out for fear.
but straightway Jesus spake unto them saying be of good
cheer it is I be not afraid.
and Peter answered him and said lord if it be thou bid me
come unto thee on the water.
and he said come. and when Peter was come down out of the
ship he walked on the water to go to Jesus.
but when he saw the wind boisterous he was afraid and
beginning to sink he cried saying lord save me.
and Immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand and caught
him and said unto him O thou of little faith wherefore
didst thou doubt?
and when they were come into the ship the wind ceased.
then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him
saying of a truth thou art the son of God.
and when they were gone over they came into the land of
Gennesaret.
and when the men of that place had knowledge of him they sent
out into all that country round about and brought unto him
all that were diseased
and besought him that they might only touch the hem of his
garment and as many as touched were made perfectly whole.
then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees which were of
Jerusalem saying
why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders?
for they wash not their hands when they eat bread.
but he answered and said unto them why do ye also transgress
the commandment of God by your tradition?
for God commanded saying honour thy father and mother and
he that curseth father or mother let him die the death.
but ye say whosoever shall say to his father or his mother
it is a gift by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me
and honour not his father or his mother he shall be free.
thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by
your tradition.
ye hypocrites well did Esaias prophesy of you saying
this people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth and
honoureth me with their lips but their heart is far from me.
but in vain they do worship me teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.
and he called the multitude and said unto them hear and
understand
not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man but that
which cometh out of the mouth this defileth a man.
then came his disciples and said unto him knowest thou that
the Pharisees were offended after they heard this saying?
but he answered and said every plant which my heavenly
father hath not planted shall be rooted up.
let them alone they be blind leaders of the blind. and if the
blind lead the blind both shall fall into the ditch.
then answered Peter and said unto him declare unto us this
parable.
and Jesus said are ye also yet without understanding?
do not ye yet understand that whatsoever entereth in at the
mouth goeth into the belly and is cast out into the draught?
but those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth
from the heart and they defile the man.
for out of the heart proceed evil thoughts murders
adulteries fornications Thefts false witness blasphemies
these are the things which defile a man but to eat with
unwashen hands defileth not a man.
then Jesus went thence and departed into the coasts of Tyre
and Sidon.
and behold a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts
and cried unto him saying have mercy on me O lord thou son
of David my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.
but he answered her not a word. and his disciples came and
besought him saying send her away for she crieth after us.
but he answered and said I Am not sent but unto the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.
then came she and worshipped him saying lord help me.
but he answered and said it is not meet to take the
children s bread and to cast it to dogs.
and she said truth lord yet the dogs eat of the crumbs
which fall from their masters table.
then Jesus answered and said unto her O woman great is thy
faith be it unto thee even as thou wilt. and her daughter was
made whole from that very hour.
and Jesus departed from thence and came nigh unto the sea of
Galilee and went up into a mountain and sat down there.
and great multitudes came unto him having with them those
that were lame blind dumb maimed and many others and cast
them down at Jesus feet and he healed them
insomuch that the multitude wondered when they saw the dumb
to speak the maimed to be whole the lame to walk and the
blind to see and they glorified the God of Israel.
then Jesus called his disciples unto him and said I have
compassion on the multitude because they continue with me now
three days and have nothing to eat and I will not send them
away fasting lest they faint in the way.
and his disciples say unto him whence should we have so Much
bread in the wilderness as to fill so great a multitude?
and Jesus saith unto them how many loaves have ye? and they
said seven and a few little fishes.
and he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground.
and he took the seven loaves and the fishes and gave thanks
and brake them and gave to his disciples and the disciples
to the multitude.
and they did all eat and were filled and they took up of the
broken meat that was left seven baskets full.
and they that did eat were four thousand men beside women and
children.
and he sent away the multitude and took ship and came into
the coasts of Magdala.
the Pharisees also with the Sadducees came and tempting
desired him that he would shew them a sign from heaven.
he answered and said unto them when it is evening ye say it
will be fair weather for the sky is red.
and in the morning it will be foul weather to day for the
sky is red and lowering. O ye hypocrites ye can discern the
face of the sky but can ye not discern the signs of the
times?
a wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign and
there shall no sign be given unto it but the sign of the
prophet Jonas. and he left them and departed.
and when his disciples were come to the other side they had
forgotten to take bread.
then Jesus said unto them take heed and beware of the leaven
of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.
and they reasoned among themselves saying it is because we
have taken no bread.
which when Jesus perceived he said unto them O ye of little
faith why reason ye among yourselves because ye have brought
no bread?
do ye not yet understand Neither remember the five loaves of
the five thousand and how many baskets ye took up?
Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand and how many
baskets ye took up?
how is it that ye do not understand that I spake it not to you
concerning bread that ye should beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and of the Sadducees?
then understood they how that he bade them not beware of the
leaven of bread but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of
the Sadducees.
when Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi he asked
his disciples saying whom do men say that I the son of man
Am?
and they said some say that thou art John the Baptist some
Elias and others Jeremias or one of the prophets.
he saith unto them but whom say ye that I Am?
and Simon Peter answered and said thou art the Christ the
son of the living God.
and Jesus answered and said unto him blessed art thou Simon
Barjona for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee
but my father which is in heaven.
and I say also unto thee that thou art Peter and upon this
rock I will build my church and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it.
and I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven
and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven.
then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man
that he was Jesus the Christ.
from that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples
how that he must go unto Jerusalem and suffer many things of
the elders and chief priests and scribes and be killed and
be raised again the third day.
then Peter took him and began to rebuke him saying be it
far from thee lord this shall not be unto thee.
but he turned and said unto Peter get thee behind me Satan
thou art an offence unto me for thou savourest not the things
that be of God but those that be of men.
then said Jesus unto his disciples if any man will come after
me let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow
me.
for whosoever will save his life shall lose it and whosoever
will lose his life for my sake shall find it.
for what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world
and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange
for his soul?
for the son of man shall come in the glory of his father with
his angels and then he shall reward every man according to
his works.
verily I say unto you there be some standing here which
shall not taste of death till they see the son of man coming
in his kingdom.
and after six days Jesus taketh Peter James and John his
brother and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart
and was transfigured before them and his face did shine as
the sun and his raiment was white as the light.
and behold there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking
with him.
then answered Peter and said unto Jesus lord it is good for
us to be here if thou wilt let us make here three
tabernacles one for thee and one for Moses and one for
Elias.
while he yet spake behold a bright cloud overshadowed them
and behold a voice out of the cloud which said this is my
beloved son in whom I Am well pleased hear ye him.
and when the disciples heard it they fell on their face and
were sore afraid.
and Jesus came and touched them and said Arise and be not
afraid.
and when they had lifted up their eyes they saw no man save
Jesus only.
and as they came down from the mountain Jesus charged them
saying tell the vision to no man until the son of man be
risen again from the dead.
and his disciples asked him saying why then say the scribes
that Elias must first come?
and Jesus answered and said unto them Elias truly shall first
come and restore all things.
but I say unto you that Elias is come already and they knew
him not but have done unto him whatsoever they listed.
likewise shall also the son of man suffer of them.
then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John
the Baptist.
and when they were come to the multitude there came to him a
certain man kneeling down to him and saying
lord have mercy on my son for he is lunatick and sore
vexed for ofttimes he falleth into the fire and oft into the
water.
and I brought him to thy disciples and they could not cure
him.
then Jesus answered and said O faithless and perverse
generation how long shall I be with you? how long shall I
suffer you? bring him hither to me.
and Jesus rebuked the devil and he departed out of him and
the child was cured from that very hour.
then came the disciples to Jesus apart and said why could
not we cast him out?
and Jesus said unto them because of your unbelief for verily
I say unto you if ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed
ye shall say unto this mountain remove hence to yonder place
and it shall remove and nothing shall be impossible unto you.
howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.
and while they abode in Galilee Jesus said unto them the son
of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men
and they shall kill him and the third day he shall be raised
again. and they were exceeding sorry.
and when they were come to Capernaum they that received
tribute money came to Peter and said doth not your Master
pay tribute?
he saith yes. and when he was come into the house Jesus
prevented him saying what thinkest thou Simon? of whom do
the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own
children or of strangers?
Peter saith unto him of strangers. Jesus saith unto him then
are the children free.
notwithstanding lest we should offend them go thou to the
sea and cast an hook and take up the fish that first cometh
up and when thou hast opened his mouth thou shalt find a
piece of money that take and give unto them for me and thee.
at the same time came the disciples unto Jesus saying who is
the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
and Jesus called a little child unto him and set him in the
midst of them
and said verily I say unto you except ye be converted and
become as little children ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven.
whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child
the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
and whoso shall receive one such little child in my name
receiveth me.
but whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe
in me it were better for him that a millstone were hanged
about his neck and that he were drowned in the depth of the
sea.
woe unto the world because of offences for it must needs be
that offences come but woe to that man by whom the offence
cometh
wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee cut them off
and cast them from thee it is better for thee to enter into
life halt or maimed rather than having two hands or two feet
to be cast into everlasting fire.
and if thine eye offend thee pluck it out and cast it from
thee it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye
rather than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.
take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones for I
say unto you that in heaven their angels do always behold the
face of my father which is in heaven.
for the son of man is come to save that which was lost.
how think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep and one of them
be gone astray doth he not leave the ninety and nine and
goeth into the mountains and seeketh that which is gone
astray?
and if so be that he find it verily I say unto you he
rejoiceth more of that sheep than of the ninety and nine
which went not astray.
even so it is not the will of your father which is in heaven
that one of these little ones should perish.
moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee go and
tell him his fault between thee and him alone if he shall
hear thee thou hast gained thy brother.
but if he will not hear thee then take with thee one or two
more that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word
may be established.
and if he shall Neglect to hear them tell it unto the church
but if he Neglect to hear the church let him be unto thee as
an heathen man and a publican.
verily I say unto you whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth
shall be loosed in heaven.
again I say unto you that if two of you shall agree on earth
as touching any thing that they shall ask it shall be done
for them of my father which is in heaven.
for where two or three are gathered together in my name there
Am I in the midst of them.
then came Peter to him and said lord how oft shall my
brother Sin against me and I forgive him? till seven times?
Jesus saith unto him I say not unto thee until seven times
but until seventy times seven.
therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain
king which would take account of his servants.
and when he had begun to reckon one was brought unto him
which owed him Ten thousand talents.
but forasmuch as he had not to pay his lord commanded him to
be sold and his wife and children and all that he had and
payment to be made.
the servant therefore fell down and worshipped him saying
lord have patience with me and I will pay thee all.
then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion and
loosed him and forgave him the debt.
but the same servant went out and found one of his
fellowservants which owed him an hundred pence and he laid
hands on him and took him by the throat saying pay me that
thou owest.
and his fellowservant fell down at his feet and besought him
saying have patience with me and I will pay thee all.
and he would not but went and cast him into prison till he
should pay the debt.
so when his fellowservants saw what was done they were very
sorry and came and told unto their lord all that was done.
then his lord after that he had called him said unto him O
thou wicked servant I forgave thee all that debt because
thou desiredst me
shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy
fellowservant even as I had pity on thee?
and his lord was wroth and delivered him to the tormentors
till he should pay all that was due unto him.
so likewise shall my heavenly father do also unto you if ye
from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.
and it came to pass that when Jesus had finished these
sayings he departed from Galilee and came into the coasts of
Judaea beyond Jordan
and great multitudes followed him and he healed them there.
the Pharisees also came unto him tempting him and saying
unto him is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for
every cause?
and he answered and said unto them have ye not read that he
which made them at the beginning made them Male and female
and said for this cause shall a man leave father and mother
and shall cleave to his wife and they twain shall be one
flesh?
wherefore they are no more twain but one flesh. what
therefore God hath joined together let not man put asunder.
they say unto him why did Moses then command to give a
writing of divorcement and to put her away?
he saith unto them Moses because of the hardness of your
hearts suffered you to put away your wives but from the
beginning it was not so.
and I say unto you whosoever shall put away his wife except
it be for fornication and shall marry another committeth
adultery and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit
adultery.
his disciples say unto him if the case of the man be so with
his wife it is not good to marry.
but he said unto them all men cannot receive this saying
save they to whom it is given.
for there are some eunuchs which were so born from their
mother s womb and there are some eunuchs which were made
eunuchs of men and there be eunuchs which have made
themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven s sake. he that
is able to receive it let him receive it.
then were there brought unto him little children that he
should put his hands on them and pray and the disciples
rebuked them.
but Jesus said suffer little children and forbid them not
to come unto me for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
and he laid his hands on them and departed thence.
and behold one came and said unto him good Master what
good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life?
and he said unto him why callest thou me good? there is none
good but one that is God but if thou wilt enter into life
keep the commandments.
he saith unto him which? Jesus said thou shalt do no murder
thou shalt not commit adultery thou shalt not steal thou
shalt not bear false witness
honour thy father and thy mother and thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself.
the young man saith unto him all these things have I kept
from my youth up what lack I yet?
Jesus said unto him if thou wilt be perfect go and sell that
thou hast and give to the poor and thou shalt have treasure
in heaven and come and follow me.
but when the young man heard that saying he went away
sorrowful for he had great possessions.
then said Jesus unto his disciples verily I say unto you
that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.
and again I say unto you it is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into
the kingdom of God.
when his disciples heard it they were exceedingly amazed
saying who then can be saved?
but Jesus beheld them and said unto them with men this is
impossible but with God all things are possible.
then answered Peter and said unto him behold we have
forsaken all and followed thee what shall we have therefore?
and Jesus said unto them verily I say unto you that ye which
have followed me in the regeneration when the son of man
shall sit in the throne of his glory ye also shall sit upon
twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
and every one that hath forsaken houses or brethren or
sisters or father or mother or wife or children or lands
for my name s sake shall receive an hundredfold and shall
inherit everlasting life.
but many that are first shall be last and the last shall be
first.
for the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an
householder which went out early in the morning to hire
labourers into his vineyard.
and when he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day
he sent them into his vineyard.
and he went out about the third hour and saw others standing
idle in the marketplace
and said unto them go ye also into the vineyard and
whatsoever is right I will give you. and they went their way.
again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour and did
likewise.
and about the eleventh hour he went out and found others
standing idle and saith unto them why stand ye here all the
day idle?
they say unto him because no man hath hired us. he saith unto
them go ye also into the vineyard and whatsoever is right
that shall ye receive.
so when even was come the lord of the vineyard saith unto his
steward call the labourers and give them their hire
beginning from the last unto the first.
and when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour
they received every man a penny.
but when the first came they supposed that they should have
received more and they likewise received every man a penny.
and when they had received it they murmured against the
goodman of the house
saying these last have wrought but one hour and thou hast
made them equal unto us which have borne the burden and heat
of the day.
but he answered one of them and said friend I do thee no
wrong didst not thou agree with me for a penny?
take that thine is and go thy way I will give unto this
last even as unto thee.
is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? is
thine eye evil because I Am good?
so the last shall be first and the first last for many be
called but few chosen.
and Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples
apart in the way and said unto them
behold we go up to Jerusalem and the son of man shall be
betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes and they
shall condemn him to death
and shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock and to scourge
and to crucify him and the third day he shall rise again.
then came to him the mother of Zebedees children with her
sons worshipping him and desiring a certain thing of him.
and he said unto her what wilt thou? she saith unto him
grant that these my two sons may sit the one on thy right
hand and the other on the left in thy kingdom.
but Jesus answered and said ye know not what ye ask. are ye
able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of and to be
baptized with the baptism that I Am baptized with? they say
unto him we are able.
and he saith unto them ye shall drink indeed of my cup and
be baptized with the baptism that I Am baptized with but to
sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to give but
it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my
father.
and when the Ten heard it they were moved with indignation
against the two brethren.
but Jesus called them unto him and said ye know that the
princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them and they
that are great exercise authority upon them.
but it shall not be so among you but whosoever will be great
among you let him be your minister
and whosoever will be chief among you let him be your
servant
even as the son of man came not to be ministered unto but to
minister and to give his life a ransom for many.
and as they departed from Jericho a great multitude followed
him.
and behold two blind men sitting by the way side when they
heard that Jesus passed by cried out saying have mercy on
us O lord thou son of David.
and the multitude rebuked them because they should hold their
peace but they cried the more saying have mercy on us O
lord thou son of David.
and Jesus stood still and called them and said what will ye
that I shall do unto you?
they say unto him lord that our eyes may be opened.
so Jesus had compassion on them and touched their eyes and
Immediately their eyes received sight and they followed him.
and when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem and were come to
Bethphage unto the mount of olives then sent Jesus two
disciples
saying unto them go into the village over against you and
straightway ye shall find an ass tied and a colt with her
loose them and bring them unto me.
and if any man say ought unto you ye shall say the lord hath
need of them and straightway he will send them.
all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by the prophet saying
tell ye the daughter of Sion behold thy king cometh unto
thee meek and sitting upon an ass and a colt the foal of an
ass.
and the disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them
and brought the ass and the colt and put on them their
clothes and they set him thereon.
and a very great multitude spread their garments in the way
others cut down branches from the trees and strawed them in
the way.
and the multitudes that went before and that followed cried
saying Hosanna to the son of David blessed is he that cometh
in the name of the lord Hosanna in the highest.
and when he was come into Jerusalem all the city was moved
saying who is this?
and the multitude said this is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth
of Galilee.
and Jesus went into the temple of God and cast out all them
that sold and bought in the temple and overthrew the tables
of the moneychangers and the seats of them that sold doves
and said unto them it is written my house shall be called
the house of prayer but ye have made it a den of thieves.
and the blind and the lame came to him in the temple and he
healed them.
and when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful
things that he did and the children crying in the temple and
saying Hosanna to the son of David they were sore
displeased
and said unto him hearest thou what these say? and Jesus
saith unto them yea have ye never read out of the mouth of
babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?
and he left them and went out of the city into Bethany and
he lodged there.
now in the morning as he returned into the city he hungered.
and when he saw a fig tree in the way he came to it and
found nothing thereon but leaves only and said unto it let
no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. and presently the
fig tree withered away.
and when the disciples saw it they marvelled saying how
soon is the fig tree withered away
Jesus answered and said unto them verily I say unto you if
ye have faith and doubt not ye shall not only do this which
is done to the fig tree but also if ye shall say unto this
mountain be thou removed and be thou cast into the sea it
shall be done.
and all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing
ye shall receive.
and when he was come into the temple the chief priests and
the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching and
said by what authority doest thou these things? and who gave
thee this authority?
and Jesus answered and said unto them I also will ask you one
thing which if ye tell me I in like wise will tell you by
what authority I do these things.
the baptism of John whence was it? from heaven or of men?
and they reasoned with themselves saying if we shall say
from heaven he will say unto us why did ye not then believe
him?
but if we shall say of men we fear the people for all hold
John as a prophet.
and they answered Jesus and said we cannot tell. and he said
unto them Neither tell I you by what authority I do these
things.
but what think ye? a certain man had two sons and he came to
the first and said son go work to day in my vineyard.
he answered and said I will not but afterward he repented
and went.
and he came to the second and said likewise. and he answered
and said I go Sir and went not.
whether of them twain did the will of his father? they say
unto him the first. Jesus saith unto them verily I say unto
you that the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of
God before you.
for John came unto you in the way of righteousness and ye
believed him not but the publicans and the harlots believed
him and ye when ye had seen it repented not afterward that
ye might believe him.
hear another parable there was a certain householder which
planted a vineyard and hedged it round about and digged a
winepress in it and built a tower and let it out to
husbandmen and went into a far country
and when the time of the fruit drew near he sent his servants
to the husbandmen that they might receive the fruits of it.
and the husbandmen took his servants and beat one and killed
another and stoned another.
again he sent other servants more than the first and they
did unto them likewise.
but last of all he sent unto them his son saying they will
reverence my son.
but when the husbandmen saw the son they said among
themselves this is the heir come let us kill him and let
us seize on his inheritance.
and they caught him and cast him out of the vineyard and
slew him.
when the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh what will he
do unto those husbandmen?
they say unto him he will miserably destroy those wicked men
and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen which
shall render him the fruits in their seasons.
Jesus saith unto them did ye never read in the scriptures
the stone which the builders rejected the same is become the
head of the corner this is the lord s doing and it is
marvellous in our eyes?
therefore say I unto you the kingdom of God shall be taken
from you and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof.
and whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken but on
whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to powder.
and when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his
parables they perceived that he spake of them.
but when they sought to lay hands on him they feared the
multitude because they took him for a prophet.
and Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables and
said
the kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king which made
a marriage for his son
and sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to
the wedding and they would not come.
again he sent forth other servants saying tell them which
are bidden behold I have prepared my dinner my oxen and my
fatlings are killed and all things are ready come unto the
marriage.
but they made light of it and went their ways one to his
farm another to his merchandise
and the remnant took his servants and entreated them
spitefully and slew them.
but when the king heard thereof he was wroth and he sent
forth his armies and destroyed those murderers and burned up
their city.
then saith he to his servants the wedding is ready but they
which were bidden were not worthy.
go ye therefore into the highways and as many as ye shall
find bid to the marriage.
so those servants went out into the highways and gathered
together all as many as they found both bad and good and the
wedding was furnished with guests.
and when the king came in to see the guests he saw there a
man which had not on a wedding garment
and he saith unto him friend how camest thou in hither not
having a wedding garment? and he was speechless.
then said the king to the servants bind him hand and foot
and take him away and cast him into outer darkness there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
for many are called but few are chosen.
then went the Pharisees and took counsel how they might
entangle him in his talk.
and they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians
saying Master we know that thou art true and teachest the
way of God in truth Neither carest thou for any man for thou
regardest not the person of men.
tell us therefore what thinkest thou? is it lawful to give
tribute unto Caesar or not?
but Jesus perceived their wickedness and said why tempt ye
me ye hypocrites?
shew me the tribute money. and they brought unto him a penny.
and he saith unto them whose is this image and
superscription?
they say unto him Caesar s. then saith he unto them render
therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar s and unto
God the things that are God s.
when they had heard these words they marvelled and left him
and went their way.
the same day came to him the Sadducees which say that there
is no resurrection and asked him
saying Master Moses said if a man die having no children
his brother shall marry his wife and raise up seed unto his
brother.
now there were with us seven brethren and the first when he
had married a wife deceased and having no issue left his
wife unto his brother
likewise the second also and the third unto the seventh.
and last of all the woman died also.
therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the
seven? for they all had her.
Jesus answered and said unto them ye do err not knowing the
scriptures nor the power of God.
for in the resurrection they Neither marry nor are given in
marriage but are as the angels of God in heaven.
but as touching the resurrection of the dead have ye not read
that which was spoken unto you by God saying
I Am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of
Jacob? God is not the God of the dead but of the living.
and when the multitude heard this they were astonished at his
doctrine.
but when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees
to silence they were gathered together.
then one of them which was a lawyer asked him a question
tempting him and saying
Master which is the great commandment in the law?
Jesus said unto him thou shalt love the lord thy God with all
thy heart and with all thy soul and with all thy mind.
this is the first and great commandment.
and the second is like unto it thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thyself.
on these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.
while the Pharisees were gathered together Jesus asked them
saying what think ye of Christ? whose son is he? they say
unto him the son of David.
he saith unto them how then doth David in spirit call him
lord saying
the lord said unto my lord sit thou on my right hand till I
make thine enemies thy footstool?
if David then call him lord how is he his son?
and no man was able to answer him a word Neither durst any
man from that day forth ask him any more questions.
then spake Jesus to the multitude and to his disciples
saying the scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat
all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe that observe
and do but do not ye after their works for they say and do
not.
for they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne and lay
them on men s shoulders but they themselves will not move
them with one of their fingers.
but all their works they do for to be seen of men they make
broad their phylacteries and enlarge the borders of their
garments
and love the uppermost rooms at feasts and the chief seats in
the synagogues
and greetings in the markets and to be called of men Rabbi
Rabbi.
but be not ye called Rabbi for one is your Master even
Christ and all ye are brethren.
and call no man your father upon the earth for one is your
father which is in heaven.
Neither be ye called masters for one is your Master even
Christ.
but he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.
and whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased and he that
shall humble himself shall be exalted.
but woe unto you scribes and Pharisees hypocrites for ye
shut up the kingdom of heaven against men for ye Neither go
in yourselves Neither suffer ye them that are entering to go
in.
woe unto you scribes and Pharisees hypocrites for ye devour
widows houses and for a pretence make long prayer therefore
ye shall receive the greater damnation.
woe unto you scribes and Pharisees hypocrites for ye
compass sea and land to make one proselyte and when he is
made ye make him twofold more the child of hell than
yourselves.
woe unto you ye blind guides which say whosoever shall
swear by the temple it is nothing but whosoever shall swear
by the gold of the temple he is a debtor
ye fools and blind for whether is greater the gold or the
temple that sanctifieth the gold?
and whosoever shall swear by the altar it is nothing but
whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it he is guilty.
ye fools and blind for whether is greater the gift or the
altar that sanctifieth the gift?
whoso therefore shall swear by the altar sweareth by it and
by all things thereon.
and whoso shall swear by the temple sweareth by it and by
him that dwelleth therein.
and he that shall swear by heaven sweareth by the throne of
God and by him that sitteth thereon.
woe unto you scribes and Pharisees hypocrites for ye pay
tithe of mint and anise and cummin and have omitted the
weightier matters of the law judgment mercy and faith
these ought ye to have done and not to leave the other
undone.
ye blind guides which strain at a gnat and swallow a camel.
woe unto you scribes and Pharisees hypocrites for ye make
clean the outside of the cup and of the platter but within
they are full of extortion and excess.
thou blind Pharisee cleanse first that which is within the
cup and platter that the outside of them may be clean also.
woe unto you scribes and Pharisees hypocrites for ye are
like unto whited sepulchres which indeed appear beautiful
outward but are within full of dead men s bones and of all
uncleanness.
even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men but
within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
woe unto you scribes and Pharisees hypocrites because ye
build the tombs of the prophets and garnish the sepulchres of
the righteous
and say if we had been in the days of our fathers we would
not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
prophets.
wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves that ye are the
children of them which killed the prophets.
fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.
ye serpents ye generation of vipers how can ye escape the
damnation of hell?
wherefore behold I send unto you prophets and wise men and
scribes and some of them ye shall kill and crucify and some
of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues and persecute
them from city to city
that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the
earth from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of
Zacharias son of Barachias whom ye slew between the temple
and the altar.
verily I say unto you all these things shall come upon this
generation.
O Jerusalem Jerusalem thou that killest the prophets and
stonest them which are sent unto thee how often would I have
gathered thy children together even as a Hen gathereth her
chickens under her wings and ye would not
behold your house is left unto you desolate.
for I say unto you ye shall not see me henceforth till ye
shall say blessed is he that cometh in the name of the lord.
and Jesus went out and departed from the temple and his
disciples came to him for to shew him the buildings of the
temple.
and Jesus said unto them see ye not all these things? verily
I say unto you there shall not be left here one stone upon
another that shall not be thrown down.
and as he sat upon the mount of olives the disciples came
unto him privately saying tell us when shall these things
be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming and of the end
of the world?
and Jesus answered and said unto them take heed that no man
deceive you.
for many shall come in my name saying I Am Christ and shall
deceive many.
and ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars see that ye be
not troubled for all these things must come to pass but the
end is not yet.
for nation shall rise against nation and kingdom against
kingdom and there shall be famines and pestilences and
earthquakes in divers places.
all these are the beginning of sorrows.
then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted and shall kill
you and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name s sake.
and then shall many be offended and shall betray one another
and shall hate one another.
and many false prophets shall rise and shall deceive many.
and because iniquity shall abound the love of many shall wax
cold.
but he that shall endure unto the end the same shall be
saved.
and this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the
world for a witness unto all nations and then shall the end
come.
when ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation
spoken of by Daniel the prophet stand in the holy place
 whoso readeth let him understand
then let them which be in Judaea flee into the mountains
let him which is on the housetop not come down to take any
thing out of his house
Neither let him which is in the field return back to take his
clothes.
and woe unto them that are with child and to them that give
suck in those days
but pray ye that your flight be not in the winter Neither on
the sabbath day
for then shall be great tribulation such as was not since the
beginning of the world to this time no nor ever shall be.
and except those days should be shortened there should no
flesh be saved but for the elect s sake those days shall be
shortened.
then if any man shall say unto you lo here is Christ or
there believe it not.
for there shall Arise false Christs and false prophets and
shall shew great signs and wonders insomuch that if it were
possible they shall deceive the very elect.
behold I have told you before.
wherefore if they shall say unto you behold he is in the
desert go not forth behold he is in the secret chambers
believe it not.
for as the lightning cometh out of the east and shineth even
unto the west so shall also the coming of the son of man be.
for wheresoever the carcase is there will the eagles be
gathered together.
Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun
be darkened and the moon shall not give her light and the
stars shall fall from heaven and the powers of the heavens
shall be shaken
and then shall appear the sign of the son of man in heaven
and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn and they
shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with
power and great glory.
and he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet
and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds
from one end of heaven to the other.
now learn a parable of the fig tree when his branch is yet
tender and putteth forth leaves ye know that summer is nigh
so likewise ye when ye shall see all these things know that
it is near even at the doors.
verily I say unto you this generation shall not pass till
all these things be fulfilled.
heaven and earth shall pass away but my words shall not pass
away.
but of that day and hour knoweth no man no not the angels of
heaven but my father only.
but as the days of Noe were so shall also the coming of the
son of man be.
for as in the days that were before the flood they were eating
and drinking marrying and giving in marriage until the day
that Noe entered into the ark
and knew not until the flood came and took them all away so
shall also the coming of the son of man be.
then shall two be in the field the one shall be taken and
the other left.
two women shall be grinding at the mill the one shall be
taken and the other left.
watch therefore for ye know not what hour your lord doth
come.
but know this that if the goodman of the house had known in
what watch the thief would come he would have watched and
would not have suffered his house to be broken up.
therefore be ye also ready for in such an hour as ye think
not the son of man cometh.
who then is a faithful and wise servant whom his lord hath
made ruler over his household to give them meat in due
season?
blessed is that servant whom his lord when he cometh shall
find so doing.
verily I say unto you that he shall make him ruler over all
his goods.
but and if that evil servant shall say in his heart my lord
delayeth his coming
and shall begin to smite his fellowservants and to eat and
drink with the drunken
the lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh
not for him and in an hour that he is not aware of
and shall cut him asunder and appoint him his portion with
the hypocrites there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto Ten virgins
which took their lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom.
and five of them were wise and five were foolish.
they that were foolish took their lamps and took no oil with
them
but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.
while the bridegroom tarried they all slumbered and slept.
and at midnight there was a cry made behold the bridegroom
cometh go ye out to meet him.
then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.
and the foolish said unto the wise give us of your oil for
our lamps are gone out.
but the wise answered saying not so lest there be not
enough for us and you but go ye rather to them that sell and
buy for yourselves.
and while they went to buy the bridegroom came and they that
were ready went in with him to the marriage and the door was
shut.
afterward came also the other virgins saying lord lord
open to us.
but he answered and said verily I say unto you I know you
not.
watch therefore for ye know Neither the day nor the hour
wherein the son of man cometh.
for the kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far
country who called his own servants and delivered unto them
his goods.
and unto one he gave five talents to another two and to
another one to every man according to his several ability
and straightway took his journey.
then he that had received the five talents went and traded
with the same and made them other five talents.
and likewise he that had received two he also gained other
two.
but he that had received one went and digged in the earth and
hid his lord s money.
after a long time the lord of those servants cometh and
reckoneth with them.
and so he that had received five talents came and brought
other five talents saying lord thou deliveredst unto me
five talents behold I have gained beside them five talents
more.
his lord said unto him well done thou good and faithful
servant thou hast been faithful over a few things I will
make thee ruler over many things enter thou into the joy of
thy lord.
he also that had received two talents came and said lord
thou deliveredst unto me two talents behold I have gained
two other talents beside them.
his lord said unto him well done good and faithful servant
thou hast been faithful over a few things I will make thee
ruler over many things enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
then he which had received the one talent came and said lord
I knew thee that thou art an hard man reaping where thou hast
not sown and gathering where thou hast not strawed
and I was afraid and went and hid thy talent in the earth
lo there thou hast that is thine.
his lord answered and said unto him thou wicked and slothful
servant thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not and
gather where I have not strawed
thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the
exchangers and then at my coming I should have received mine
own with usury.
take therefore the talent from him and give it unto him which
hath Ten talents.
for unto every one that hath shall be given and he shall have
abundance but from him that hath not shall be taken away even
that which he hath.
and cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
when the son of man shall come in his glory and all the holy
angels with him then shall he sit upon the throne of his
glory
and before him shall be gathered all nations and he shall
separate them one from another as a Shepherd divideth his
sheep from the goats
and he shall set the sheep on his right hand but the goats on
the left.
then shall the king say unto them on his right hand come ye
blessed of my father inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world
for I was an hungred and ye gave me meat I was thirsty and
ye gave me drink I was a stranger and ye took me in
naked and ye clothed me I was sick and ye visited me I was
in prison and ye came unto me.
then shall the righteous answer him saying lord when saw we
thee an hungred and fed thee? or thirsty and gave thee
drink?
when saw we thee a stranger and took thee in? or naked and
clothed thee?
or when saw we thee sick or in prison and came unto thee?
and the king shall answer and say unto them verily I say unto
you inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren ye have done it unto me.
then shall he say also unto them on the left hand depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil
and his angels
for I was an hungred and ye gave me no meat I was thirsty
and ye gave me no drink
I was a stranger and ye took me not in naked and ye clothed
me not sick and in prison and ye visited me not.
then shall they also answer him saying lord when saw we
thee an hungred or athirst or a stranger or naked or sick
or in prison and did not minister unto thee?
then shall he answer them saying verily I say unto you
inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these ye did
it not to me.
and these shall go away into everlasting punishment but the
righteous into life eternal.
and it came to pass when Jesus had finished all these
sayings he said unto his disciples
ye know that after two days is the feast of the passover and
the son of man is betrayed to be crucified.
then assembled together the chief priests and the scribes
and the elders of the people unto the palace of the high
priest who was called Caiaphas
and consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty and kill
him.
but they said not on the feast day lest there be an uproar
among the people.
now when Jesus was in Bethany in the house of Simon the
leper
there came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very
precious ointment and poured it on his head as he sat at
meat.
but when his disciples saw it they had indignation saying
to what purpose is this waste?
for this ointment might have been sold for Much and given to
the poor.
when Jesus understood it he said unto them why trouble ye
the woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon me.
for ye have the poor always with you but me ye have not
always.
for in that she hath poured this ointment on my body she did
it for my burial.
verily I say unto you wheresoever this gospel shall be
preached in the whole world there shall also this that this
woman hath done be told for a memorial of her.
then one of the twelve called Judas Iscariot went unto the
chief priests
and said unto them what will ye give me and I will deliver
him unto you? and they covenanted with him for thirty pieces
of Silver.
and from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.
now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the
disciples came to Jesus saying unto him where wilt thou that
we prepare for thee to eat the passover?
and he said go into the city to such a man and say unto him
the Master saith my time is at hand I will keep the passover
at thy house with my disciples.
and the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them and they
made ready the passover.
now when the even was come he sat down with the twelve.
and as they did eat he said verily I say unto you that one
of you shall betray me.
and they were exceeding sorrowful and began every one of them
to say unto him lord is it I?
and he answered and said he that dippeth his hand with me in
the dish the same shall betray me.
the son of man goeth as it is written of him but woe unto
that man by whom the son of man is betrayed it had been good
for that man if he had not been born.
then Judas which betrayed him answered and said Master is
it I? he said unto him thou hast said.
and as they were eating Jesus took bread and blessed it and
brake it and gave it to the disciples and said take eat
this is my body.
and he took the cup and gave thanks and gave it to them
saying drink ye all of it
for this is my blood of the new testament which is shed for
many for the remission of sins.
but I say unto you I will not drink henceforth of this fruit
of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in my
father s kingdom.
and when they had sung an hymn they went out into the mount
of olives.
then saith Jesus unto them all ye shall be offended because
of me this night for it is written I will smite the
Shepherd and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered
abroad.
but after I Am risen again I will go before you into Galilee.
Peter answered and said unto him though all men shall be
offended because of thee yet will I never be offended.
Jesus said unto him verily I say unto thee that this night
before the cock crow thou shalt deny me thrice.
Peter said unto him though I should die with thee yet will I
not deny thee. likewise also said all the disciples.
then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane
and saith unto the disciples sit ye here while I go and pray
yonder.
and he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee and
began to be sorrowful and very heavy.
then saith he unto them my soul is exceeding sorrowful even
unto death tarry ye here and watch with me.
and he went a little farther and fell on his face and
prayed saying O my father if it be possible let this cup
pass from me nevertheless not as I will but as thou wilt.
and he cometh unto the disciples and findeth them asleep and
saith unto Peter what could ye not watch with me one hour?
watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation the spirit
indeed is willing but the flesh is weak.
he went away again the second time and prayed saying O my
father if this cup may not pass away from me except I drink
it thy will be done.
and he came and found them asleep again for their eyes were
heavy.
and he left them and went away again and prayed the third
time saying the same words.
then cometh he to his disciples and saith unto them sleep on
now and take your rest behold the hour is at hand and the
son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
rise let us be going behold he is at hand that doth betray
me.
and while he yet spake lo Judas one of the twelve came
and with him a great multitude with swords and staves from
the chief priests and elders of the people.
now he that betrayed him gave them a sign saying whomsoever
I shall Kiss that same is he hold him fast.
and forthwith he came to Jesus and said hail Master and
kissed him.
and Jesus said unto him friend wherefore art thou come? then
came they and laid hands on Jesus and took him.
and behold one of them which were with Jesus stretched out
his hand and drew his sword and struck a servant of the high
priest s and smote off his ear.
then said Jesus unto him put up again thy sword into his
place for all they that take the sword shall perish with the
sword.
thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my father and he
shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?
but how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled that thus it
must be?
in that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes are ye come
out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me?
I sat daily with you teaching in the temple and ye laid no
hold on me.
but all this was done that the scriptures of the prophets
might be fulfilled. then all the disciples forsook him and
fled.
and they that had laid hold on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas
the high priest where the scribes and the elders were
assembled.
but Peter followed him afar off unto the high priest s palace
and went in and sat with the servants to see the end.
now the chief priests and elders and all the council sought
false witness against Jesus to put him to death
but found none yea though many false witnesses came yet
found they none. at the last came two false witnesses
and said this fellow said I Am able to destroy the temple of
God and to build it in three days.
and the high priest arose and said unto him answerest thou
nothing? what is it which these witness against thee?
but Jesus held his peace and the high priest answered and
said unto him I adjure thee by the living God that thou tell
us whether thou be the Christ the son of God.
Jesus saith unto him thou hast said nevertheless I say unto
you hereafter shall ye see the son of man sitting on the
right hand of power and coming in the clouds of heaven.
then the high priest rent his clothes saying he hath spoken
blasphemy what further need have we of witnesses? behold now
ye have heard his blasphemy.
what think ye? they answered and said he is guilty of death.
then did they spit in his face and buffeted him and others
smote him with the palms of their hands
saying prophesy unto us thou Christ who is he that smote
thee?
now Peter sat without in the palace and a damsel came unto
him saying thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee.
but he denied before them all saying I know not what thou
sayest.
and when he was gone out into the porch another maid saw him
and said unto them that were there this fellow was also with
Jesus of Nazareth.
and again he denied with an oath I do not know the man.
and after a while came unto him they that stood by and said
to Peter surely thou also art one of them for thy speech
bewrayeth thee.
then began he to curse and to swear saying I know not the
man. and Immediately the cock crew.
and Peter remembered the word of Jesus which said unto him
before the cock crow thou shalt deny me thrice. and he went
out and wept bitterly.
when the morning was come all the chief priests and elders of
the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death
and when they had bound him they led him away and delivered
him to Pontius Pilate the Governor.
then Judas which had betrayed him when he saw that he was
condemned repented himself and brought again the thirty
pieces of Silver to the chief priests and elders
saying I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent
blood. and they said what is that to us? see thou to that.
and he cast down the pieces of Silver in the temple and
departed and went and hanged himself.
and the chief priests took the Silver pieces and said it is
not lawful for to put them into the treasury because it is
the price of blood.
and they took counsel and bought with them the potter s
field to bury strangers in.
wherefore that field was called the field of blood unto this
day.
then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the
prophet saying and they took the thirty pieces of Silver
the price of him that was valued whom they of the children of
Israel did value
and gave them for the potter s field as the lord appointed
me.
and Jesus stood before the Governor and the Governor asked
him saying art thou the king of the Jews? and Jesus said
unto him thou sayest.
and when he was accused of the chief priests and elders he
answered nothing.
then said Pilate unto him hearest thou not how many things
they witness against thee?
and he answered him to never a word insomuch that the
Governor marvelled greatly.
now at that feast the Governor was wont to release unto the
people a prisoner whom they would.
and they had then a notable prisoner called Barabbas.
therefore when they were gathered together Pilate said unto
them whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas or Jesus
which is called Christ?
for he knew that for envy they had delivered him.
when he was set down on the judgment seat his wife sent unto
him saying have thou nothing to do with that just man for I
have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.
but the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that
they should ask Barabbas and destroy Jesus.
the Governor answered and said unto them whether of the twain
will ye that I release unto you? they said Barabbas.
Pilate saith unto them what shall I do then with Jesus which
is called Christ? they all say unto him let him be crucified.
and the Governor said why what evil hath he done? but they
cried out the more saying let him be crucified.
when Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing but that rather
a tumult was made he took water and washed his hands before
the multitude saying I Am innocent of the blood of this just
person see ye to it.
then answered all the people and said his blood be on us
and on our children.
then released he Barabbas unto them and when he had scourged
Jesus he delivered him to be crucified.
then the soldiers of the Governor took Jesus into the common
hall and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers.
and they stripped him and put on him a scarlet robe.
and when they had platted a crown of thorns they put it upon
his head and a reed in his right hand and they bowed the
knee before him and mocked him saying hail king of the
Jews
and they spit upon him and took the reed and smote him on
the head.
and after that they had mocked him they took the robe off
from him and put his own raiment on him and led him away to
crucify him.
and as they came out they found a man of Cyrene Simon by
name him they compelled to bear his cross.
and when they were come unto a place called Golgotha that is
to say a place of a skull
they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall and when he
had tasted thereof he would not drink.
and they crucified him and parted his garments casting lots
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet
they parted my garments among them and upon my vesture did
they cast lots.
and sitting down they watched him there
and set up over his head his accusation written this is Jesus
the king of the Jews.
then were there two thieves crucified with him one on the
right hand and another on the left.
and they that passed by reviled him wagging their heads
and saying thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it
in three days save thyself. if thou be the son of God come
down from the cross.
likewise also the chief priests mocking him with the scribes
and elders said
he saved others himself he cannot save. if he be the king of
Israel let him now come down from the cross and we will
believe him.
he trusted in God let him deliver him now if he will have
him for he said I Am the son of God.
the thieves also which were crucified with him cast the same
in his teeth.
now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land
unto the ninth hour.
and about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice
saying Eli Eli lama sabachthani? that is to say my God my
God why hast thou forsaken me?
some of them that stood there when they heard that said
this man calleth for Elias.
and straightway one of them ran and took a spunge and filled
it with vinegar and put it on a reed and gave him to drink.
the rest said let be let us see whether Elias will come to
save him.
Jesus when he had cried again with a loud voice yielded up
the ghost.
and behold the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the
top to the bottom and the earth did quake and the rocks
rent
and the graves were opened and many bodies of the saints
which slept arose
and came out of the graves after his resurrection and went
into the holy city and appeared unto many.
now when the centurion and they that were with him watching
Jesus saw the earthquake and those things that were done
they feared greatly saying truly this was the son of God.
and many women were there beholding afar off which followed
Jesus from Galilee ministering unto him
among which was Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James
and Joses and the mother of Zebedees children.
when the even was come there came a rich man of Arimathaea
named Joseph who also himself was Jesus disciple
he went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. then Pilate
commanded the body to be delivered.
and when Joseph had taken the body he wrapped it in a clean
linen cloth
and laid it in his own new tomb which he had hewn out in the
rock and he rolled a great stone to the door of the
sepulchre and departed.
and there was Mary Magdalene and the other Mary sitting over
against the sepulchre.
now the next day that followed the day of the preparation
the chief priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate
saying Sir we remember that that deceiver said while he was
yet alive after three days I will rise again.
command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the
third day lest his disciples come by night and steal him
away and say unto the people he is risen from the dead so
the last error shall be worse than the first.
Pilate said unto them ye have a watch go your way make it
as sure as ye can.
so they went and made the sepulchre sure sealing the stone
and setting a watch.
in the end of the sabbath as it began to dawn toward the
first day of the week came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary
to see the sepulchre.
and behold there was a great earthquake for the angel of
the lord descended from heaven and came and rolled back the
stone from the door and sat upon it.
his countenance was like lightning and his raiment white as
snow
and for fear of him the keepers did shake and became as dead
men.
and the angel answered and said unto the women fear not ye
for I know that ye seek Jesus which was crucified.
he is not here for he is risen as he said. come see the
place where the lord lay.
and go quickly and tell his disciples that he is risen from
the dead and behold he goeth before you into Galilee there
shall ye see him lo I have told you.
and they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and
great joy and did run to bring his disciples word.
and as they went to tell his disciples behold Jesus met
them saying all hail. and they came and held him by the
feet and worshipped him.
then said Jesus unto them be not afraid go tell my brethren
that they go into Galilee and there shall they see me.
now when they were going behold some of the watch came into
the city and shewed unto the chief priests all the things
that were done.
and when they were assembled with the elders and had taken
counsel they gave large money unto the soldiers
saying say ye his disciples came by night and stole him
away while we slept.
and if this come to the Governor s ears we will persuade him
and secure you.
so they took the money and did as they were taught and this
saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day.
then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee into a
mountain where Jesus had appointed them.
and when they saw him they worshipped him but some doubted.
and Jesus came and spake unto them saying all power is given
unto me in heaven and in earth.
go ye therefore and teach all nations baptizing them in the
name of the father and of the son and of the holy ghost
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you and lo I Am with you alway even unto the end
of the world. Amen.
the beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God
as it is written in the prophets behold I send my messenger
before thy face which shall prepare thy way before thee.
the voice of one crying in the wilderness prepare ye the way
of the lord make his paths straight.
John did baptize in the wilderness and preach the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins.
and there went out unto him all the land of Judaea and they
of Jerusalem and were all baptized of him in the river of
Jordan confessing their sins.
and John was clothed with camel s hair and with a girdle of a
skin about his loins and he did eat locusts and wild honey
and preached saying there cometh one mightier than I after
me the latchet of whose shoes I Am not worthy to stoop down
and unloose.
I indeed have baptized you with water but he shall baptize
you with the holy ghost.
and it came to pass in those days that Jesus came from
Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized of John in Jordan.
and straightway coming up out of the water he saw the heavens
opened and the spirit like a dove descending upon him
and there came a voice from heaven saying thou art my
beloved son in whom I Am well pleased.
and Immediately the spirit driveth him into the wilderness.
and he was there in the wilderness forty days tempted of
Satan and was with the wild beasts and the angels ministered
unto him.
now after that John was put in prison Jesus came into
Galilee preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God
and saying the time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God is
at hand repent ye and believe the gospel.
now as he walked by the sea of Galilee he saw Simon and
Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea for they were
fishers.
and Jesus said unto them come ye after me and I will make
you to become fishers of men.
and straightway they forsook their nets and followed him.
and when he had gone a little farther thence he saw James the
son of Zebedee and John his brother who also were in the
ship mending their nets.
and straightway he called them and they left their father
Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants and went after
him.
and they went into Capernaum and straightway on the sabbath
day he entered into the synagogue and taught.
and they were astonished at his doctrine for he taught them
as one that had authority and not as the scribes.
and there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit
and he cried out
saying let us alone what have we to do with thee thou Jesus
of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou
art the holy one of God.
and Jesus rebuked him saying hold thy peace and come out of
him.
and when the unclean spirit had torn him and cried with a
loud voice he came out of him.
and they were all amazed insomuch that they questioned among
themselves saying what thing is this? what new doctrine is
this? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean
spirits and they do obey him.
and Immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the
region round about Galilee.
and forthwith when they were come out of the synagogue they
entered into the house of Simon and Andrew with James and
John.
but Simon s wife s mother lay sick of a fever and anon they
tell him of her.
and he came and took her by the hand and lifted her up and
Immediately the fever left her and she ministered unto them.
and at even when the sun did set they brought unto him all
that were diseased and them that were possessed with devils.
and all the city was gathered together at the door.
and he healed many that were sick of divers diseases and cast
out many devils and suffered not the devils to speak because
they knew him.
and in the morning rising up a great while before day he
went out and departed into a solitary place and there
prayed.
and Simon and they that were with him followed after him.
and when they had found him they said unto him all men seek
for thee.
and he said unto them let us go into the next towns that I
may preach there also for therefore came I forth.
and he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee
and cast out devils.
and there came a leper to him beseeching him and kneeling
down to him and saying unto him if thou wilt thou canst
make me clean.
and Jesus moved with compassion put forth his hand and
touched him and saith unto him I will be thou clean.
and as soon as he had spoken Immediately the leprosy departed
from him and he was cleansed.
and he straitly charged him and forthwith sent him away
and saith unto him see thou say nothing to any man but go
thy way shew thyself to the priest and offer for thy
cleansing those things which Moses commanded for a testimony
unto them.
but he went out and began to publish it Much and to blaze
abroad the matter insomuch that Jesus could no more openly
enter into the city but was without in desert places and
they came to him from every quarter.
and again he entered into Capernaum after some days and it
was noised that he was in the house.
and straightway many were gathered together insomuch that
there was no room to receive them no not so Much as about
the door and he preached the word unto them.
and they come unto him bringing one sick of the palsy which
was borne of four.
and when they could not come nigh unto him for the press they
uncovered the roof where he was and when they had broken it
up they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay.
when Jesus saw their faith he said unto the sick of the
palsy son thy sins be forgiven thee.
but there was certain of the scribes sitting there and
reasoning in their hearts
why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins
but God only?
and Immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they
so reasoned within themselves he said unto them why reason
ye these things in your hearts?
whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy thy sins
be forgiven thee or to say Arise and take up thy bed and
walk?
but that ye may know that the son of man hath power on earth
to forgive sins he saith to the sick of the palsy
I say unto thee Arise and take up thy bed and go thy way
into thine house.
and Immediately he arose took up the bed and went forth
before them all insomuch that they were all amazed and
glorified God saying we never saw it on this fashion.
and he went forth again by the sea side and all the multitude
resorted unto him and he taught them.
and as he passed by he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting
at the receipt of custom and said unto him follow me. and he
arose and followed him.
and it came to pass that as Jesus sat at meat in his house
many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and
his disciples for there were many and they followed him.
and when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans
and sinners they said unto his disciples how is it that he
eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners?
when Jesus heard it he saith unto them they that are whole
have no need of the Physician but they that are sick I came
not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.
and the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast
and they come and say unto him why do the disciples of John
and of the Pharisees fast but thy disciples fast not?
and Jesus said unto them can the children of the bridechamber
fast while the bridegroom is with them? as long as they have
the bridegroom with them they cannot fast.
but the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken
away from them and then shall they fast in those days.
no man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment
else the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old
and the rent is made worse.
and no man putteth new wine into old bottles else the new
wine doth burst the bottles and the wine is spilled and the
bottles will be marred but new wine must be put into new
bottles.
and it came to pass that he went through the corn fields on
the sabbath day and his disciples began as they went to
pluck the ears of corn.
and the Pharisees said unto him behold why do they on the
sabbath day that which is not lawful?
and he said unto them have ye never read what David did when
he had need and was an hungred he and they that were with
him?
how he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the
high priest and did eat the shewbread which is not lawful to
eat but for the priests and gave also to them which were with
him?
and he said unto them the sabbath was made for man and not
man for the sabbath
therefore the son of man is lord also of the sabbath.
and he entered again into the synagogue and there was a man
there which had a withered hand.
and they watched him whether he would heal him on the sabbath
day that they might accuse him.
and he saith unto the man which had the withered hand stand
forth.
and he saith unto them is it lawful to do good on the sabbath
days or to do evil? to save life or to kill? but they held
their peace.
and when he had looked round about on them with anger being
grieved for the hardness of their hearts he saith unto the
man stretch forth thine hand. and he stretched it out and
his hand was restored whole as the other.
and the Pharisees went forth and straightway took counsel
with the Herodians against him how they might destroy him.
but Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea and
a great multitude from Galilee followed him and from Judaea
and from Jerusalem and from Idumaea and from beyond Jordan
and they about Tyre and Sidon a great multitude when they
had heard what great things he did came unto him.
and he spake to his disciples that a small ship should wait
on him because of the multitude lest they should throng him.
for he had healed many insomuch that they pressed upon him
for to touch him as many as had plagues.
and unclean spirits when they saw him fell down before him
and cried saying thou art the son of God.
and he straitly charged them that they should not make him
known.
and he goeth up into a mountain and calleth unto him whom he
would and they came unto him.
and he ordained twelve that they should be with him and that
he might send them forth to preach
and to have power to heal sicknesses and to cast out devils
and Simon he surnamed Peter
and James the son of Zebedee and John the brother of James
and he surnamed them Boanerges which is the sons of thunder
and Andrew and Philip and Bartholomew and Matthew and
Thomas and James the son of Alphaeus and Thaddaeus and
Simon the Canaanite
and Judas Iscariot which also betrayed him and they went
into an house.
and the multitude cometh together again so that they could
not so Much as eat bread.
and when his friends heard of it they went out to lay hold on
him for they said he is beside himself.
and the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said he hath
Beelzebub and by the prince of the devils casteth he out
devils.
and he called them unto him and said unto them in parables
how can Satan cast out Satan?
and if a kingdom be divided against itself that kingdom
cannot stand.
and if a house be divided against itself that house cannot
stand.
and if Satan rise up against himself and be divided he
cannot stand but hath an end.
no man can enter into a strong man s house and spoil his
goods except he will first bind the strong man and then he
will spoil his house.
verily I say unto you all sins shall be forgiven unto the
sons of men and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall
blaspheme
but he that shall blaspheme against the holy ghost hath never
forgiveness but is in danger of eternal damnation.
because they said he hath an unclean spirit.
there came then his brethren and his mother and standing
without sent unto him calling him.
and the multitude sat about him and they said unto him
behold thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.
and he answered them saying who is my mother or my
brethren?
and he looked round about on them which sat about him and
said behold my mother and my brethren
for whosoever shall do the will of God the same is my
brother and my sister and mother.
and he began again to teach by the sea side and there was
gathered unto him a great multitude so that he entered into a
ship and sat in the sea and the whole multitude was by the
sea on the land.
and he taught them many things by parables and said unto them
in his doctrine
hearken behold there went out a sower to sow
and it came to pass as he sowed some fell by the way side
and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up.
and some fell on stony ground where it had not Much earth
and Immediately it sprang up because it had no depth of
earth
but when the sun was up it was scorched and because it had
no root it withered away.
and some fell among thorns and the thorns grew up and choked
it and it yielded no fruit.
and other fell on good ground and did yield fruit that sprang
up and increased and brought forth some thirty and some
sixty and some an hundred.
and he said unto them he that hath ears to hear let him
hear.
and when he was alone they that were about him with the
twelve asked of him the parable.
and he said unto them unto you it is given to know the
mystery of the kingdom of God but unto them that are without
all these things are done in parables
that seeing they may see and not perceive and hearing they
may hear and not understand lest at any time they should be
converted and their sins should be forgiven them.
and he said unto them know ye not this parable? and how then
will ye know all parables?
the sower soweth the word.
and these are they by the way side where the word is sown
but when they have heard Satan cometh Immediately and taketh
away the word that was sown in their hearts.
and these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground
who when they have heard the word Immediately receive it
with gladness
and have no root in themselves and so endure but for a time
afterward when affliction or persecution ariseth for the
word s sake Immediately they are offended.
and these are they which are sown among thorns such as hear
the word
and the cares of this world and the deceitfulness of Riches
and the lusts of other things entering in choke the word and
it becometh unfruitful.
and these are they which are sown on good ground such as hear
the word and receive it and bring forth fruit some
thirtyfold some sixty and some an hundred.
and he said unto them is a candle brought to be put under a
bushel or under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick?
for there is nothing hid which shall not be manifested
Neither was any thing kept secret but that it should come
abroad.
if any man have ears to hear let him hear.
and he said unto them take heed what ye hear with what
measure ye mete it shall be measured to you and unto you
that hear shall more be given.
for he that hath to him shall be given and he that hath not
from him shall be taken even that which he hath.
and he said so is the kingdom of God as if a man should cast
seed into the ground
and should sleep and rise night and day and the seed should
spring and grow up he knoweth not how.
for the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself first the
blade then the ear after that the full corn in the ear.
but when the fruit is brought forth Immediately he putteth in
the sickle because the harvest is come.
and he said whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or
with what comparison shall we compare it?
it is like a grain of mustard seed which when it is sown in
the earth is less than all the seeds that be in the earth
but when it is sown it groweth up and becometh greater than
all herbs and shooteth out great branches so that the fowls
of the air may lodge under the shadow of it.
and with many such parables spake he the word unto them as
they were able to hear it.
but without a parable spake he not unto them and when they
were alone he expounded all things to his disciples.
and the same day when the even was come he saith unto them
let us pass over unto the other side.
and when they had sent away the multitude they took him even
as he was in the ship. and there were also with him other
little ships.
and there arose a great storm of wind and the waves beat into
the ship so that it was now full.
and he was in the hinder part of the ship asleep on a pillow
and they awake him and say unto him Master carest thou not
that we perish?
and he arose and rebuked the wind and said unto the sea
peace be still. and the wind ceased and there was a great
calm.
and he said unto them why are ye so fearful? how is it that
ye have no faith?
and they feared exceedingly and said one to another what
manner of man is this that even the wind and the sea obey
him?
and they came over unto the other side of the sea into the
country of the Gadarenes.
and when he was come out of the ship Immediately there met
him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit
who had his dwelling among the tombs and no man could bind
him no not with chains
because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains
and the chains had been plucked asunder by him and the
fetters broken in pieces Neither could any man tame him.
and always night and day he was in the mountains and in the
tombs crying and cutting himself with stones.
but when he saw Jesus afar off he ran and worshipped him
and cried with a loud voice and said what have I to do with
thee Jesus thou son of the most high God? I adjure thee by
God that thou torment me not.
for he said unto him come out of the man thou unclean
spirit.
and he asked him what is thy name? and he answered saying
my name is legion for we are many.
and he besought him Much that he would not send them away out
of the country.
now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of
swine feeding.
and all the devils besought him saying send us into the
swine that we may enter into them.
and forthwith Jesus gave them leave. and the unclean spirits
went out and entered into the swine and the herd ran
violently down a steep place into the sea they were about
two thousand and were choked in the sea.
and they that fed the swine fled and told it in the city and
in the country. and they went out to see what it was that was
done.
and they come to Jesus and see him that was possessed with
the devil and had the legion sitting and clothed and in
his right mind and they were afraid.
and they that saw it told them how it befell to him that was
possessed with the devil and also concerning the swine.
and they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts.
and when he was come into the ship he that had been possessed
with the devil prayed him that he might be with him.
howbeit Jesus suffered him not but saith unto him go home to
thy friends and tell them how great things the lord hath done
for thee and hath had compassion on thee.
and he departed and began to publish in Decapolis how great
things Jesus had done for him and all men did marvel.
and when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other
side Much people gathered unto him and he was nigh unto the
sea.
and behold there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue
Jairus by name and when he saw him he fell at his feet
and besought him greatly saying my little daughter lieth at
the point of death I pray thee come and lay thy hands on
her that she may be healed and she shall live.
and Jesus went with him and Much people followed him and
thronged him.
and a certain woman which had an issue of blood twelve years
and had suffered many things of many physicians and had spent
all that she had and was nothing bettered but rather grew
worse
when she had heard of Jesus came in the press behind and
touched his garment.
for she said if I may touch but his clothes I shall be
whole.
and straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up and
she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.
and Jesus Immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone
out of him turned him about in the press and said who
touched my clothes?
and his disciples said unto him thou seest the multitude
thronging thee and sayest thou who touched me?
and he looked round about to see her that had done this thing.
but the woman fearing and trembling knowing what was done in
her came and fell down before him and told him all the
truth.
and he said unto her daughter thy faith hath made thee
whole go in peace and be whole of thy plague.
while he yet spake there came from the ruler of the
synagogue s house certain which said thy daughter is dead
why troublest thou the Master any further?
as soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken he saith unto
the ruler of the synagogue be not afraid only believe.
and he suffered no man to follow him save Peter and James
and John the brother of James.
and he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue and
seeth the tumult and them that wept and wailed greatly.
and when he was come in he saith unto them why make ye this
ado and weep? the damsel is not dead but sleepeth.
and they laughed him to scorn. but when he had put them all
out he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel and
them that were with him and entereth in where the damsel was
lying.
and he took the damsel by the hand and said unto her Talitha
cumi which is being interpreted damsel I say unto thee
Arise.
and straightway the damsel arose and walked for she was of
the age of twelve years. and they were astonished with a great
astonishment.
and he charged them straitly that no man should know it and
commanded that something should be given her to eat.
and he went out from thence and came into his own country
and his disciples follow him.
and when the sabbath day was come he began to teach in the
synagogue and many hearing him were astonished saying from
whence hath this man these things? and what wisdom is this
which is given unto him that even such Mighty works are
wrought by his hands?
is not this the carpenter the son of Mary the brother of
James and Joses and of Juda and Simon? and are not his
sisters here with us? and they were offended at him.
but Jesus said unto them a prophet is not without honour
but in his own country and among his own kin and in his own
house.
and he could there do no Mighty work save that he laid his
hands upon a few sick folk and healed them.
and he marvelled because of their unbelief. and he went round
about the villages teaching.
and he called unto him the twelve and began to send them
forth by two and two and gave them power over unclean
spirits
and commanded them that they should take nothing for their
journey save a staff only no scrip no bread no money in
their purse
but be shod with sandals and not put on two coats.
and he said unto them in what place soever ye enter into an
house there abide till ye depart from that place.
and whosoever shall not receive you nor hear you when ye
depart thence shake off the dust under your feet for a
testimony against them. verily I say unto you it shall be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment
than for that city.
and they went out and preached that men should repent.
and they cast out many devils and anointed with oil many that
were sick and healed them.
and king Herod heard of him for his name was spread abroad
and he said that John the Baptist was risen from the dead
and therefore Mighty works do shew forth themselves in him.
others said that it is Elias. and others said that it is a
prophet or as one of the prophets.
but when Herod heard thereof he said it is John whom I
beheaded he is risen from the dead.
for Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon John and
bound him in prison for Herodias sake his brother Philip s
wife for he had married her.
for John had said unto Herod it is not lawful for thee to
have thy brother s wife.
therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him and would have
killed him but she could not
for Herod feared John knowing that he was a just man and an
holy and observed him and when he heard him he did many
things and heard him gladly.
and when a convenient day was come that Herod on his birthday
made a supper to his lords high captains and chief estates
of Galilee
and when the daughter of the said Herodias came in and
danced and pleased Herod and them that sat with him the king
said unto the damsel ask of me whatsoever thou wilt and I
will give it thee.
and he sware unto her whatsoever thou shalt ask of me I will
give it thee unto the half of my kingdom.
and she went forth and said unto her mother what shall I
ask? and she said the head of John the Baptist.
and she came in straightway with haste unto the king and
asked saying I will that thou give me by and by in a charger
the head of John the Baptist.
and the king was exceeding sorry yet for his oath s sake and
for their sakes which sat with him he would not reject her.
and Immediately the king sent an executioner and commanded
his head to be brought and he went and beheaded him in the
prison
and brought his head in a charger and gave it to the damsel
and the damsel gave it to her mother.
and when his disciples heard of it they came and took up his
corpse and laid it in a tomb.
and the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus and
told him all things both what they had done and what they
had taught.
and he said unto them come ye yourselves apart into a desert
place and rest a while for there were many coming and going
and they had no leisure so Much as to eat.
and they departed into a desert place by ship privately.
and the people saw them departing and many knew him and ran
afoot thither out of all cities and outwent them and came
together unto him.
and Jesus when he came out saw Much people and was moved
with compassion toward them because they were as sheep not
having a Shepherd and he began to teach them many things.
and when the day was now far spent his disciples came unto
him and said this is a desert place and now the time is far
passed
send them away that they may go into the country round about
and into the villages and buy themselves bread for they have
nothing to eat.
he answered and said unto them give ye them to eat. and they
say unto him shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of
bread and give them to eat?
he saith unto them how many loaves have ye? go and see. and
when they knew they say five and two fishes.
and he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon
the green grass.
and they sat down in ranks by hundreds and by fifties.
and when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes he
looked up to heaven and blessed and brake the loaves and
gave them to his disciples to set before them and the two
fishes divided he among them all.
and they did all eat and were filled.
and they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments and of
the fishes.
and they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand
men.
and straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the
ship and to go to the other side before unto Bethsaida while
he sent away the people.
and when he had sent them away he departed into a mountain to
pray.
and when even was come the ship was in the midst of the sea
and he alone on the land.
and he saw them toiling in rowing for the wind was contrary
unto them and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh
unto them walking upon the sea and would have passed by
them.
but when they saw him walking upon the sea they supposed it
had been a spirit and cried out
for they all saw him and were troubled. and Immediately he
talked with them and saith unto them be of good cheer it is
I be not afraid.
and he went up unto them into the ship and the wind ceased
and they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure and
wondered.
for they considered not the miracle of the loaves for their
heart was hardened.
and when they had passed over they came into the land of
Gennesaret and drew to the shore.
and when they were come out of the ship straightway they knew
him
and ran through that whole region round about and began to
carry about in beds those that were sick where they heard he
was.
and whithersoever he entered into villages or cities or
country they laid the sick in the streets and besought him
that they might touch if it were but the border of his
garment and as many as touched him were made whole.
then came together unto him the Pharisees and certain of the
scribes which came from Jerusalem.
and when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with
defiled that is to say with unwashen hands they found
fault.
for the Pharisees and all the Jews except they wash their
hands oft eat not holding the tradition of the elders.
and when they come from the market except they wash they eat
not. and many other things there be which they have received
to hold as the washing of cups and pots brasen vessels and
of tables.
then the Pharisees and scribes asked him why walk not thy
disciples according to the tradition of the elders but eat
bread with unwashen hands?
he answered and said unto them well hath Esaias prophesied of
you hypocrites as it is written this people honoureth me
with their lips but their heart is far from me.
howbeit in vain do they worship me teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.
for laying aside the commandment of God ye hold the tradition
of men as the washing of pots and cups and many other such
like things ye do.
and he said unto them full well ye reject the commandment of
God that ye may keep your own tradition.
for Moses said honour thy father and thy mother and whoso
curseth father or mother let him die the death
but ye say if a man shall say to his father or mother it is
Corban that is to say a gift by whatsoever thou mightest be
profited by me he shall be free.
and ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or his
mother
making the word of God of none effect through your tradition
which ye have delivered and many such like things do ye.
and when he had called all the people unto him he said unto
them hearken unto me every one of you and understand
there is nothing from without a man that entering into him
can defile him but the things which come out of him those
are they that defile the man.
if any man have ears to hear let him hear.
and when he was entered into the house from the people his
disciples asked him concerning the parable.
and he saith unto them are ye so without understanding also?
do ye not perceive that whatsoever thing from without
entereth into the man it cannot defile him
because it entereth not into his heart but into the belly
and goeth out into the draught purging all meats?
and he said that which cometh out of the man that defileth
the man.
for from within out of the heart of men proceed evil
thoughts adulteries fornications murders
Thefts covetousness wickedness deceit lasciviousness an
evil eye blasphemy pride foolishness
all these evil things come from within and defile the man.
and from thence he arose and went into the borders of Tyre
and Sidon and entered into an house and would have no man
know it but he could not be hid.
for a certain woman whose young daughter had an unclean
spirit heard of him and came and fell at his feet
the woman was a Greek a Syrophenician by nation and she
besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her
daughter.
but Jesus said unto her let the children first be filled for
it is not meet to take the children s bread and to cast it
unto the dogs.
and she answered and said unto him yes lord yet the dogs
under the table eat of the children s crumbs.
and he said unto her for this saying go thy way the devil is
gone out of thy daughter.
and when she was come to her house she found the devil gone
out and her daughter laid upon the bed.
and again departing from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon he
came unto the sea of Galilee through the midst of the coasts
of Decapolis.
and they bring unto him one that was deaf and had an
impediment in his speech and they beseech him to put his hand
upon him.
and he took him aside from the multitude and put his fingers
into his ears and he spit and touched his tongue
and looking up to heaven he sighed and saith unto him
Ephphatha that is be opened.
and straightway his ears were opened and the string of his
tongue was loosed and he spake plain.
and he charged them that they should tell no man but the more
he charged them so Much the more a great deal they published
it
and were beyond measure astonished saying he hath done all
things well he maketh both the deaf to hear and the dumb to
speak.
in those days the multitude being very great and having
nothing to eat Jesus called his disciples unto him and saith
unto them
I have compassion on the multitude because they have now been
with me three days and have nothing to eat
and if I send them away fasting to their own houses they will
faint by the way for divers of them came from far.
and his disciples answered him from whence can a man satisfy
these men with bread here in the wilderness?
and he asked them how many loaves have ye? and they said
seven.
and he commanded the people to sit down on the ground and he
took the seven loaves and gave thanks and brake and gave to
his disciples to set before them and they did set them before
the people.
and they had a few small fishes and he blessed and commanded
to set them also before them.
so they did eat and were filled and they took up of the
broken meat that was left seven baskets.
and they that had eaten were about four thousand and he sent
them away.
and straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples and
came into the parts of Dalmanutha.
and the Pharisees came forth and began to question with him
seeking of him a sign from heaven tempting him.
and he sighed deeply in his spirit and saith why doth this
generation seek after a sign? verily I say unto you there
shall no sign be given unto this generation.
and he left them and entering into the ship again departed to
the other side.
now the disciples had forgotten to take bread Neither had
they in the ship with them more than one loaf.
and he charged them saying take heed beware of the leaven
of the Pharisees and of the leaven of Herod.
and they reasoned among themselves saying it is because we
have no bread.
and when Jesus knew it he saith unto them why reason ye
because ye have no bread? perceive ye not yet Neither
understand? have ye your heart yet hardened?
having eyes see ye not? and having ears hear ye not? and do
ye not remember?
when I brake the five loaves among five thousand how many
baskets full of fragments took ye up? they say unto him
twelve.
and when the seven among four thousand how many baskets full
of fragments took ye up? and they said seven.
and he said unto them how is it that ye do not understand?
and he cometh to Bethsaida and they bring a blind man unto
him and besought him to touch him.
and he took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the
town and when he had spit on his eyes and put his hands upon
him he asked him if he saw ought.
and he looked up and said I see men as trees walking.
after that he put his hands again upon his eyes and made him
look up and he was restored and saw every man clearly.
and he sent him away to his house saying Neither go into the
town nor tell it to any in the town.
and Jesus went out and his disciples into the towns of
Caesarea Philippi and by the way he asked his disciples
saying unto them whom do men say that I Am?
and they answered John the Baptist but some say Elias and
others one of the prophets.
and he saith unto them but whom say ye that I Am? and Peter
answereth and saith unto him thou art the Christ.
and he charged them that they should tell no man of him.
and he began to teach them that the son of man must suffer
many things and be rejected of the elders and of the chief
priests and scribes and be killed and after three days rise
again.
and he spake that saying openly. and Peter took him and began
to rebuke him.
but when he had turned about and looked on his disciples he
rebuked Peter saying get thee behind me Satan for thou
savourest not the things that be of God but the things that
be of men.
and when he had called the people unto him with his disciples
also he said unto them whosoever will come after me let him
deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.
for whosoever will save his life shall lose it but whosoever
shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel s the same
shall save it.
for what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole
world and lose his own soul?
or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in
this adulterous and sinful generation of him also shall the
son of man be ashamed when he cometh in the glory of his
father with the holy angels.
and he said unto them verily I say unto you that there be
some of them that stand here which shall not taste of death
till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power.
and after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter and James and
John and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by
themselves and he was transfigured before them.
and his raiment became shining exceeding white as snow so as
no fuller on earth can white them.
and there appeared unto them Elias with Moses and they were
talking with Jesus.
and Peter answered and said to Jesus Master it is good for
us to be here and let us make three tabernacles one for
thee and one for Moses and one for Elias.
for he wist not what to say for they were sore afraid.
and there was a cloud that overshadowed them and a voice came
out of the cloud saying this is my beloved son hear him.
and suddenly when they had looked round about they saw no
man any more save Jesus only with themselves.
and as they came down from the mountain he charged them that
they should tell no man what things they had seen till the
son of man were risen from the dead.
and they kept that saying with themselves questioning one
with another what the rising from the dead should mean.
and they asked him saying why say the scribes that Elias
must first come?
and he answered and told them Elias verily cometh first and
restoreth all things and how it is written of the son of man
that he must suffer many things and be set at nought.
but I say unto you that Elias is indeed come and they have
done unto him whatsoever they listed as it is written of him.
and when he came to his disciples he saw a great multitude
about them and the scribes questioning with them.
and straightway all the people when they beheld him were
greatly amazed and running to him saluted him.
and he asked the scribes what question ye with them?
and one of the multitude answered and said Master I have
brought unto thee my son which hath a dumb spirit
and wheresoever he taketh him he teareth him and he foameth
and gnasheth with his teeth and pineth away and I spake to
thy disciples that they should cast him out and they could
not.
he answereth him and saith O faithless generation how long
shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him
unto me.
and they brought him unto him and when he saw him
straightway the spirit tare him and he fell on the ground
and wallowed foaming.
and he asked his father how long is it ago since this came
unto him? and he said of a child.
and ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire and into the
waters to destroy him but if thou canst do any thing have
compassion on us and help us.
Jesus said unto him if thou canst believe all things are
possible to him that believeth.
and straightway the father of the child cried out and said
with tears lord I believe help thou mine unbelief.
when Jesus saw that the people came running together he
rebuked the foul spirit saying unto him thou dumb and deaf
spirit I charge thee come out of him and enter no more into
him.
and the spirit cried and rent him sore and came out of him
and he was as one dead insomuch that many said he is dead.
but Jesus took him by the hand and lifted him up and he
arose.
and when he was come into the house his disciples asked him
privately why could not we cast him out?
and he said unto them this kind can come forth by nothing
but by prayer and fasting.
and they departed thence and passed through Galilee and he
would not that any man should know it.
for he taught his disciples and said unto them the son of
man is delivered into the hands of men and they shall kill
him and after that he is killed he shall rise the third day.
but they understood not that saying and were afraid to ask
him.
and he came to Capernaum and being in the house he asked
them what was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the
way?
but they held their peace for by the way they had disputed
among themselves who should be the greatest.
and he sat down and called the twelve and saith unto them
if any man desire to be first the same shall be last of all
and servant of all.
and he took a child and set him in the midst of them and
when he had taken him in his arms he said unto them
whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name
receiveth me and whosoever shall receive me receiveth not
me but him that sent me.
and John answered him saying Master we saw one casting out
devils in thy name and he followeth not us and we forbad
him because he followeth not us.
but Jesus said forbid him not for there is no man which
shall do a miracle in my name that can lightly speak evil of
me.
for he that is not against us is on our part.
for whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my
name because ye belong to Christ verily I say unto you he
shall not lose his reward.
and whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that
believe in me it is better for him that a millstone were
hanged about his neck and he were cast into the sea.
and if thy hand offend thee cut it off it is better for thee
to enter into life maimed than having two hands to go into
hell into the fire that never shall be quenched
where their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched.
and if thy foot offend thee cut it off it is better for thee
to enter halt into life than having two feet to be cast into
hell into the fire that never shall be quenched
where their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched.
and if thine eye offend thee pluck it out it is better for
thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye than
having two eyes to be cast into hell fire
where their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched.
for every one shall be salted with fire and every sacrifice
shall be salted with salt.
salt is good but if the salt have lost his saltness
wherewith will ye season it? have salt in yourselves and have
peace one with another.
and he arose from thence and cometh into the coasts of Judaea
by the farther side of Jordan and the people resort unto him
again and as he was wont he taught them again.
and the Pharisees came to him and asked him is it lawful for
a man to put away his wife? tempting him.
and he answered and said unto them what did Moses command
you?
and they said Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement
and to put her away.
and Jesus answered and said unto them for the hardness of
your heart he wrote you this precept.
but from the beginning of the creation God made them Male and
female.
for this cause shall a man leave his father and mother and
cleave to his wife
and they twain shall be one flesh so then they are no more
twain but one flesh.
what therefore God hath joined together let not man put
asunder.
and in the house his disciples asked him again of the same
matter.
and he saith unto them whosoever shall put away his wife and
marry another committeth adultery against her.
and if a woman shall put away her husband and be married to
another she committeth adultery.
and they brought young children to him that he should touch
them and his disciples rebuked those that brought them.
but when Jesus saw it he was Much displeased and said unto
them suffer the little children to come unto me and forbid
them not for of such is the kingdom of God.
verily I say unto you whosoever shall not receive the kingdom
of God as a little child he shall not enter therein.
and he took them up in his arms put his hands upon them and
blessed them.
and when he was gone forth into the way there came one
running and kneeled to him and asked him good Master what
shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?
and Jesus said unto him why callest thou me good? there is
none good but one that is God.
thou knowest the commandments do not commit adultery do not
kill do not steal do not bear false witness defraud not
honour thy father and mother.
and he answered and said unto him Master all these have I
observed from my youth.
then Jesus beholding him loved him and said unto him one
thing thou lackest go thy way sell whatsoever thou hast and
give to the poor and thou shalt have treasure in heaven and
come take up the cross and follow me.
and he was sad at that saying and went away grieved for he
had great possessions.
and Jesus looked round about and saith unto his disciples
how hardly shall they that have Riches enter into the kingdom
of God
and the disciples were astonished at his words. but Jesus
answereth again and saith unto them children how hard is it
for them that trust in Riches to enter into the kingdom of
God
it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
and they were astonished out of measure saying among
themselves who then can be saved?
and Jesus looking upon them saith with men it is impossible
but not with God for with God all things are possible.
then Peter began to say unto him lo we have left all and
have followed thee.
and Jesus answered and said verily I say unto you there is
no man that hath left house or brethren or sisters or
father or mother or wife or children or lands for my
sake and the gospel s
but he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time houses
and brethren and sisters and mothers and children and
lands with persecutions and in the world to come eternal
life.
but many that are first shall be last and the last first.
and they were in the way going up to Jerusalem and Jesus went
before them and they were amazed and as they followed they
were afraid. and he took again the twelve and began to tell
them what things should happen unto him
saying behold we go up to Jerusalem and the son of man
shall be delivered unto the chief priests and unto the
scribes and they shall condemn him to death and shall
deliver him to the Gentiles
and they shall mock him and shall scourge him and shall spit
upon him and shall kill him and the third day he shall rise
again.
and James and John the sons of Zebedee come unto him
saying Master we would that thou shouldest do for us
whatsoever we shall desire.
and he said unto them what would ye that I should do for you?
they said unto him grant unto us that we may sit one on thy
right hand and the other on thy left hand in thy glory.
but Jesus said unto them ye know not what ye ask can ye
drink of the cup that I drink of? and be baptized with the
baptism that I Am baptized with?
and they said unto him we can. and Jesus said unto them ye
shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of and with the
baptism that I Am baptized withal shall ye be baptized
but to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to
give but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared.
and when the Ten heard it they began to be Much displeased
with James and John.
but Jesus called them to him and saith unto them ye know
that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles
exercise lordship over them and their great ones exercise
authority upon them.
but so shall it not be among you but whosoever will be great
among you shall be your minister
and whosoever of you will be the chiefest shall be servant of
all.
for even the son of man came not to be ministered unto but to
minister and to give his life a ransom for many.
and they came to Jericho and as he went out of Jericho with
his disciples and a great number of people blind Bartimaeus
the son of Timaeus sat by the highway side begging.
and when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth he began to
cry out and say Jesus thou son of David have mercy on me.
and many charged him that he should hold his peace but he
cried the more a great deal thou son of David have mercy on
me.
and Jesus stood still and commanded him to be called. and
they call the blind man saying unto him be of good comfort
rise he calleth thee.
and he casting away his garment rose and came to Jesus.
and Jesus answered and said unto him what wilt thou that I
should do unto thee? the blind man said unto him lord that I
might receive my sight.
and Jesus said unto him go thy way thy faith hath made thee
whole. and Immediately he received his sight and followed
Jesus in the way.
and when they came nigh to Jerusalem unto Bethphage and
Bethany at the mount of olives he sendeth forth two of his
disciples
and saith unto them go your way into the village over against
you and as soon as ye be entered into it ye shall find a
colt tied whereon never man sat loose him and bring him.
and if any man say unto you why do ye this? say ye that the
lord hath need of him and straightway he will send him
hither.
and they went their way and found the colt tied by the door
without in a place where two ways met and they loose him.
and certain of them that stood there said unto them what do
ye loosing the colt?
and they said unto them even as Jesus had commanded and they
let them go.
and they brought the colt to Jesus and cast their garments on
him and he sat upon him.
and many spread their garments in the way and others cut down
branches off the trees and strawed them in the way.
and they that went before and they that followed cried
saying Hosanna blessed is he that cometh in the name of the
lord
blessed be the kingdom of our father David that cometh in the
name of the lord Hosanna in the highest.
and Jesus entered into Jerusalem and into the temple and
when he had looked round about upon all things and now the
eventide was come he went out unto Bethany with the twelve.
and on the morrow when they were come from Bethany he was
hungry
and seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves he came if
haply he might find any thing thereon and when he came to it
he found nothing but leaves for the time of figs was not yet.
and Jesus answered and said unto it no man eat fruit of thee
hereafter for ever. and his disciples heard it.
and they come to Jerusalem and Jesus went into the temple
and began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple
and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers and the seats
of them that sold doves
and would not suffer that any man should carry any vessel
through the temple.
and he taught saying unto them is it not written my house
shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye
have made it a den of thieves.
and the scribes and chief priests heard it and sought how
they might destroy him for they feared him because all the
people was astonished at his doctrine.
and when even was come he went out of the city.
and in the morning as they passed by they saw the fig tree
dried up from the roots.
and Peter calling to remembrance saith unto him Master
behold the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away.
and Jesus answering saith unto them have faith in God.
for verily I say unto you that whosoever shall say unto this
mountain be thou removed and be thou cast into the sea and
shall not doubt in his heart but shall believe that those
things which he saith shall come to pass he shall have
whatsoever he saith.
therefore I say unto you what things soever ye desire when
ye pray believe that ye receive them and ye shall have them.
and when ye stand praying forgive if ye have ought against
any that your father also which is in heaven may forgive you
your trespasses.
but if ye do not forgive Neither will your father which is in
heaven forgive your trespasses.
and they come again to Jerusalem and as he was walking in the
temple there come to him the chief priests and the scribes
and the elders
and say unto him by what authority doest thou these things?
and who gave thee this authority to do these things?
and Jesus answered and said unto them I will also ask of you
one question and answer me and I will tell you by what
authority I do these things.
the baptism of John was it from heaven or of men? answer me.
and they reasoned with themselves saying if we shall say
from heaven he will say why then did ye not believe him?
but if we shall say of men they feared the people for all
men counted John that he was a prophet indeed.
and they answered and said unto Jesus we cannot tell. and
Jesus answering saith unto them Neither do I tell you by what
authority I do these things.
and he began to speak unto them by parables. a certain man
planted a vineyard and set an hedge about it and digged a
place for the winefat and built a tower and let it out to
husbandmen and went into a far country.
and at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant that he
might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the
vineyard.
and they caught him and beat him and sent him away empty.
and again he sent unto them another servant and at him they
cast stones and wounded him in the head and sent him away
shamefully handled.
and again he sent another and him they killed and many
others beating some and killing some.
having yet therefore one son his wellbeloved he sent him
also last unto them saying they will reverence my son.
but those husbandmen said among themselves this is the heir
come let us kill him and the inheritance shall be our s.
and they took him and killed him and cast him out of the
vineyard.
what shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do? he will come
and destroy the husbandmen and will give the vineyard unto
others.
and have ye not read this scripture the stone which the
builders rejected is become the head of the corner
this was the lord s doing and it is marvellous in our eyes?
and they sought to lay hold on him but feared the people for
they knew that he had spoken the parable against them and
they left him and went their way.
and they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the
Herodians to catch him in his words.
and when they were come they say unto him Master we know
that thou art true and carest for no man for thou regardest
not the person of men but teachest the way of God in truth
is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not?
shall we give or shall we not give? but he knowing their
hypocrisy said unto them why tempt ye me? bring me a penny
that I may see it.
and they brought it. and he saith unto them whose is this
image and superscription? and they said unto him Caesar s.
and Jesus answering said unto them render to Caesar the
things that are Caesar s and to God the things that are
God s. and they marvelled at him.
then come unto him the Sadducees which say there is no
resurrection and they asked him saying
Master Moses wrote unto us if a man s brother die and leave
his wife behind him and leave no children that his brother
should take his wife and raise up seed unto his brother.
now there were seven brethren and the first took a wife and
dying left no seed.
and the second took her and died Neither left he any seed
and the third likewise.
and the seven had her and left no seed last of all the woman
died also.
in the resurrection therefore when they shall rise whose
wife shall she be of them? for the seven had her to wife.
and Jesus answering said unto them do ye not therefore err
because ye know not the scriptures Neither the power of God?
for when they shall rise from the dead they Neither marry
nor are given in marriage but are as the angels which are in
heaven.
and as touching the dead that they rise have ye not read in
the book of Moses how in the bush God spake unto him saying
I Am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of
Jacob?
he is not the God of the dead but the God of the living ye
therefore do greatly err.
and one of the scribes came and having heard them reasoning
together and perceiving that he had answered them well asked
him which is the first commandment of all?
and Jesus answered him the first of all the commandments is
hear O Israel the lord our God is one lord
and thou shalt love the lord thy God with all thy heart and
with all thy soul and with all thy mind and with all thy
strength this is the first commandment.
and the second is like namely this thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself. there is none other commandment greater
than these.
and the scribe said unto him well Master thou hast said the
truth for there is one God and there is none other but he
and to love him with all the heart and with all the
understanding and with all the soul and with all the
strength and to love his neighbour as himself is more than
all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.
and when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly he said unto
him thou art not far from the kingdom of God. and no man
after that durst ask him any question.
and Jesus answered and said while he taught in the temple
how say the scribes that Christ is the son of David?
for David himself said by the holy ghost the lord said to my
lord sit thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy
footstool.
David therefore himself calleth him lord and whence is he
then his son? and the common people heard him gladly.
and he said unto them in his doctrine beware of the scribes
which love to go in long clothing and love salutations in the
marketplaces
and the chief seats in the synagogues and the uppermost rooms
at feasts
which devour widows houses and for a pretence make long
prayers these shall receive greater damnation.
and Jesus sat over against the treasury and beheld how the
people cast money into the treasury and many that were rich
cast in Much.
and there came a certain poor widow and she threw in two
mites which make a farthing.
and he called unto him his disciples and saith unto them
verily I say unto you that this poor widow hath cast more in
than all they which have cast into the treasury
for all they did cast in of their abundance but she of her
want did cast in all that she had even all her living.
and as he went out of the temple one of his disciples saith
unto him Master see what manner of stones and what buildings
are here
and Jesus answering said unto him seest thou these great
buildings? there shall not be left one stone upon another
that shall not be thrown down.
and as he sat upon the mount of olives over against the
temple Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him
privately
tell us when shall these things be? and what shall be the
sign when all these things shall be fulfilled?
and Jesus answering them began to say take heed lest any man
deceive you
for many shall come in my name saying I Am Christ and shall
deceive many.
and when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars be ye not
troubled for such things must needs be but the end shall not
be yet.
for nation shall rise against nation and kingdom against
kingdom and there shall be earthquakes in divers places and
there shall be famines and troubles these are the beginnings
of sorrows.
but take heed to yourselves for they shall deliver you up to
councils and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten and ye
shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake for a
testimony against them.
and the gospel must first be published among all nations.
but when they shall lead you and deliver you up take no
thought beforehand what ye shall speak Neither do ye
premeditate but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour
that speak ye for it is not ye that speak but the holy
ghost.
now the brother shall betray the brother to death and the
father the son and children shall rise up against their
parents and shall cause them to be put to death.
and ye shall be hated of all men for my name s sake but he
that shall endure unto the end the same shall be saved.
but when ye shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of
by Daniel the prophet standing where it ought not let him
that readeth understand then let them that be in Judaea flee
to the mountains
and let him that is on the housetop not go down into the
house Neither enter therein to take any thing out of his
house
and let him that is in the field not turn back again for to
take up his garment.
but woe to them that are with child and to them that give
suck in those days
and pray ye that your flight be not in the winter.
for in those days shall be affliction such as was not from
the beginning of the creation which God created unto this
time Neither shall be.
and except that the lord had shortened those days no flesh
should be saved but for the elect s sake whom he hath
chosen he hath shortened the days.
and then if any man shall say to you lo here is Christ or
lo he is there believe him not
for false Christs and false prophets shall rise and shall
shew signs and wonders to seduce if it were possible even
the elect.
but take ye heed behold I have foretold you all things.
but in those days after that tribulation the sun shall be
darkened and the moon shall not give her light
and the stars of heaven shall fall and the powers that are in
heaven shall be shaken.
and then shall they see the son of man coming in the clouds
with great power and glory.
and then shall he send his angels and shall gather together
his elect from the four winds from the uttermost part of the
earth to the uttermost part of heaven.
now learn a parable of the fig tree when her branch is yet
tender and putteth forth leaves ye know that summer is near
so ye in like manner when ye shall see these things come to
pass know that it is nigh even at the doors.
verily I say unto you that this generation shall not pass
till all these things be done.
heaven and earth shall pass away but my words shall not pass
away.
but of that day and that hour knoweth no man no not the
angels which are in heaven Neither the son but the father.
take ye heed watch and pray for ye know not when the time
is.
for the son of man is as a man taking a far journey who left
his house and gave authority to his servants and to every
man his work and commanded the porter to watch.
watch ye therefore for ye know not when the Master of the
house cometh at even or at midnight or at the cockcrowing
or in the morning
lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.
and what I say unto you I say unto all watch.
after two days was the feast of the passover and of
unleavened bread and the chief priests and the scribes sought
how they might take him by craft and put him to death.
but they said not on the feast day lest there be an uproar
of the people.
and being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper as he
sat at meat there came a woman having an alabaster box of
ointment of spikenard very precious and she brake the box
and poured it on his head.
and there were some that had indignation within themselves
and said why was this waste of the ointment made?
for it might have been sold for more than three hundred pence
and have been given to the poor. and they murmured against
her.
and Jesus said let her alone why trouble ye her? she hath
wrought a good work on me.
for ye have the poor with you always and whensoever ye will
ye may do them good but me ye have not always.
she hath done what she could she is come aforehand to anoint
my body to the burying.
verily I say unto you wheresoever this gospel shall be
preached throughout the whole world this also that she hath
done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her.
and Judas Iscariot one of the twelve went unto the chief
priests to betray him unto them.
and when they heard it they were glad and promised to give
him money. and he sought how he might conveniently betray him.
and the first day of unleavened bread when they killed the
passover his disciples said unto him where wilt thou that we
go and prepare that thou mayest eat the passover?
and he sendeth forth two of his disciples and saith unto
them go ye into the city and there shall meet you a man
bearing a pitcher of water follow him.
and wheresoever he shall go in say ye to the goodman of the
house the Master saith where is the guestchamber where I
shall eat the passover with my disciples?
and he will shew you a large upper room furnished and
prepared there make ready for us.
and his disciples went forth and came into the city and
found as he had said unto them and they made ready the
passover.
and in the evening he cometh with the twelve.
and as they sat and did eat Jesus said verily I say unto
you one of you which eateth with me shall betray me.
and they began to be sorrowful and to say unto him one by
one is it I? and another said is it I?
and he answered and said unto them it is one of the twelve
that dippeth with me in the dish.
the son of man indeed goeth as it is written of him but woe
to that man by whom the son of man is betrayed good were it
for that man if he had never been born.
and as they did eat Jesus took bread and blessed and brake
it and gave to them and said take eat this is my body.
and he took the cup and when he had given thanks he gave it
to them and they all drank of it.
and he said unto them this is my blood of the new testament
which is shed for many.
verily I say unto you I will drink no more of the fruit of
the vine until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of
God.
and when they had sung an hymn they went out into the mount
of olives.
and Jesus saith unto them all ye shall be offended because of
me this night for it is written I will smite the Shepherd
and the sheep shall be scattered.
but after that I Am risen I will go before you into Galilee.
but Peter said unto him although all shall be offended yet
will not I.
and Jesus saith unto him verily I say unto thee that this
day even in this night before the cock crow twice thou
shalt deny me thrice.
but he spake the more vehemently if I should die with thee I
will not deny thee in any wise. likewise also said they all.
and they came to a place which was named Gethsemane and he
saith to his disciples sit ye here while I shall pray.
and he taketh with him Peter and James and John and began to
be sore amazed and to be very heavy
and saith unto them my soul is exceeding sorrowful unto
death tarry ye here and watch.
and he went forward a little and fell on the ground and
prayed that if it were possible the hour might pass from
him.
and he said Abba father all things are possible unto thee
take away this cup from me nevertheless not what I will but
what thou wilt.
and he cometh and findeth them sleeping and saith unto
Peter Simon sleepest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour?
watch ye and pray lest ye enter into temptation. the spirit
truly is ready but the flesh is weak.
and again he went away and prayed and spake the same words.
and when he returned he found them asleep again for their
eyes were heavy Neither wist they what to answer him.
and he cometh the third time and saith unto them sleep on
now and take your rest it is enough the hour is come
behold the son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
rise up let us go lo he that betrayeth me is at hand.
and Immediately while he yet spake cometh Judas one of the
twelve and with him a great multitude with swords and staves
from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders.
and he that betrayed him had given them a token saying
whomsoever I shall Kiss that same is he take him and lead
him away safely.
and as soon as he was come he goeth straightway to him and
saith Master Master and kissed him.
and they laid their hands on him and took him.
and one of them that stood by drew a sword and smote a
servant of the high priest and cut off his ear.
and Jesus answered and said unto them are ye come out as
against a thief with swords and with staves to take me?
I was daily with you in the temple teaching and ye took me
not but the scriptures must be fulfilled.
and they all forsook him and fled.
and there followed him a certain young man having a linen
cloth cast about his naked body and the young men laid hold
on him
and he left the linen cloth and fled from them naked.
and they led Jesus away to the high priest and with him were
assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the
scribes.
and Peter followed him afar off even into the palace of the
high priest and he sat with the servants and warmed himself
at the fire.
and the chief priests and all the council sought for witness
against Jesus to put him to death and found none.
for many bare false witness against him but their witness
agreed not together.
and there arose certain and bare false witness against him
saying
we heard him say I will destroy this temple that is made with
hands and within three days I will build another made without
hands.
but Neither so did their witness agree together.
and the high priest stood up in the midst and asked Jesus
saying answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness
against thee?
but he held his peace and answered nothing. again the high
priest asked him and said unto him art thou the Christ the
son of the blessed?
and Jesus said I Am and ye shall see the son of man sitting
on the right hand of power and coming in the clouds of
heaven.
then the high priest rent his clothes and saith what need we
any further witnesses?
ye have heard the blasphemy what think ye? and they all
condemned him to be guilty of death.
and some began to spit on him and to cover his face and to
buffet him and to say unto him prophesy and the servants
did strike him with the palms of their hands.
and as Peter was beneath in the palace there cometh one of
the maids of the high priest
and when she saw Peter warming himself she looked upon him
and said and thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.
but he denied saying I know not Neither understand I what
thou sayest. and he went out into the porch and the cock
crew.
and a maid saw him again and began to say to them that stood
by this is one of them.
and he denied it again. and a little after they that stood by
said again to Peter surely thou art one of them for thou art
a Galilaean and thy speech agreeth thereto.
but he began to curse and to swear saying I know not this
man of whom ye speak.
and the second time the cock crew. and Peter called to mind
the word that Jesus said unto him before the cock crow twice
thou shalt deny me thrice. and when he thought thereon he
wept.
and straightway in the morning the chief priests held a
consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole
council and bound Jesus and carried him away and delivered
him to Pilate.
and Pilate asked him art thou the king of the Jews? and he
answering said unto them thou sayest it.
and the chief priests accused him of many things but he
answered nothing.
and Pilate asked him again saying answerest thou nothing?
behold how many things they witness against thee.
but Jesus yet answered nothing so that Pilate marvelled.
now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner
whomsoever they desired.
and there was one named Barabbas which lay bound with them
that had made insurrection with him who had committed murder
in the insurrection.
and the multitude crying aloud began to desire him to do as he
had ever done unto them.
but Pilate answered them saying will ye that I release unto
you the king of the Jews?
for he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy.
but the chief priests moved the people that he should rather
release Barabbas unto them.
and Pilate answered and said again unto them what will ye
then that I shall do unto him whom ye call the king of the
Jews?
and they cried out again crucify him.
then Pilate said unto them why what evil hath he done? and
they cried out the more exceedingly crucify him.
and so Pilate willing to content the people released
Barabbas unto them and delivered Jesus when he had scourged
him to be crucified.
and the soldiers led him away into the hall called
Praetorium and they call together the whole band.
and they clothed him with purple and platted a crown of
thorns and put it about his head
and began to salute him hail king of the Jews
and they smote him on the head with a reed and did spit upon
him and bowing their knees worshipped him.
and when they had mocked him they took off the purple from
him and put his own clothes on him and led him out to
crucify him.
and they compel one Simon a Cyrenian who passed by coming
out of the country the father of Alexander and Rufus to bear
his cross.
and they bring him unto the place Golgotha which is being
interpreted the place of a skull.
and they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh but he
received it not.
and when they had crucified him they parted his garments
casting lots upon them what every man should take.
and it was the third hour and they crucified him.
and the superscription of his accusation was written over the
king of the Jews.
and with him they crucify two thieves the one on his right
hand and the other on his left.
and the scripture was fulfilled which saith and he was
numbered with the transgressors.
and they that passed by railed on him wagging their heads
and saying ah thou that destroyest the temple and buildest
it in three days
save thyself and come down from the cross.
likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves
with the scribes he saved others himself he cannot save.
let Christ the king of Israel descend now from the cross that
we may see and believe. and they that were crucified with him
reviled him.
and when the sixth hour was come there was darkness over the
whole land until the ninth hour.
and at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice saying
Eloi Eloi lama sabachthani? which is being interpreted my
God my God why hast thou forsaken me?
and some of them that stood by when they heard it said
behold he calleth Elias.
and one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar and put it on
a reed and gave him to drink saying let alone let us see
whether Elias will come to take him down.
and Jesus cried with a loud voice and gave up the ghost.
and the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to
the bottom.
and when the centurion which stood over against him saw that
he so cried out and gave up the ghost he said truly this
man was the son of God.
there were also women looking on afar off among whom was Mary
Magdalene and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses
and Salome
 who also when he was in Galilee followed him and
ministered unto him and many other women which came up with
him unto Jerusalem.
and now when the even was come because it was the
preparation that is the day before the sabbath
Joseph of Arimathaea an honourable counsellor which also
waited for the kingdom of God came and went in boldly unto
Pilate and craved the body of Jesus.
and Pilate marvelled if he were already dead and calling unto
him the centurion he asked him whether he had been any while
dead.
and when he knew it of the centurion he gave the body to
Joseph.
and he bought fine linen and took him down and wrapped him
in the linen and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out
of a rock and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre.
and Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses beheld where
he was laid.
and when the sabbath was past Mary Magdalene and Mary the
mother of James and Salome had bought sweet spices that
they might come and anoint him.
and very early in the morning the first day of the week they
came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun.
and they said among themselves who shall roll us away the
stone from the door of the sepulchre?
and when they looked they saw that the stone was rolled away
for it was very great.
and entering into the sepulchre they saw a young man sitting
on the right side clothed in a long white garment and they
were affrighted.
and he saith unto them be not affrighted ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth which was crucified he is risen he is not here
behold the place where they laid him.
but go your way tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth
before you into Galilee there shall ye see him as he said
unto you.
and they went out quickly and fled from the sepulchre for
they trembled and were amazed Neither said they any thing to
any man for they were afraid.
now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week he
appeared first to Mary Magdalene out of whom he had cast
seven devils.
and she went and told them that had been with him as they
mourned and wept.
and they when they had heard that he was alive and had been
seen of her believed not.
after that he appeared in another form unto two of them as
they walked and went into the country.
and they went and told it unto the residue Neither believed
they them.
afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat and
upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart
because they believed not them which had seen him after he was
risen.
and he said unto them go ye into all the world and preach
the gospel to every creature.
he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved but he that
believeth not shall be damned.
and these signs shall follow them that believe in my name
shall they cast out devils they shall speak with new tongues
they shall take up serpents and if they drink any deadly
thing it shall not hurt them they shall lay hands on the
sick and they shall recover.
so then after the lord had spoken unto them he was received
up into heaven and sat on the right hand of God.
and they went forth and preached every where the lord
working with them and confirming the word with signs
following. Amen.
forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a
declaration of those things which are most surely believed
among us
even as they delivered them unto us which from the beginning
were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word
it seemed good to me also having had perfect understanding of
all things from the very first to write unto thee in order
most excellent Theophilus
that thou mightest know the certainty of those things wherein
thou hast been instructed.
there was in the days of Herod the king of Judaea a certain
priest named Zacharias of the course of Abia and his wife
was of the daughters of Aaron and her name was Elisabeth.
and they were both righteous before God walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the lord blameless.
and they had no child because that Elisabeth was barren and
they both were now well stricken in years.
and it came to pass that while he executed the priest s
office before God in the order of his course
according to the custom of the priest s office his Lot was to
burn incense when he went into the temple of the lord.
and the whole multitude of the people were praying without at
the time of incense.
and there appeared unto him an angel of the lord standing on
the right side of the altar of incense.
and when Zacharias saw him he was troubled and fear fell
upon him.
but the angel said unto him fear not Zacharias for thy
prayer is heard and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son
and thou shalt call his name John.
and thou shalt have joy and gladness and many shall rejoice
at his birth.
for he shall be great in the sight of the lord and shall
drink Neither wine nor strong drink and he shall be filled
with the holy ghost even from his mother s womb.
and many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the lord
their God.
and he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias
to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just to make ready a people
prepared for the lord.
and Zacharias said unto the angel whereby shall I know this?
for I Am an old man and my wife well stricken in years.
and the angel answering said unto him I Am Gabriel that
stand in the presence of God and Am sent to speak unto thee
and to shew thee these glad tidings.
and behold thou shalt be dumb and not able to speak until
the day that these things shall be performed because thou
believest not my words which shall be fulfilled in their
season.
and the people waited for Zacharias and marvelled that he
tarried so long in the temple.
and when he came out he could not speak unto them and they
perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple for he
beckoned unto them and remained speechless.
and it came to pass that as soon as the days of his
ministration were accomplished he departed to his own house.
and after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived and hid
herself five months saying
thus hath the lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked
on me to take away my reproach among men.
and in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God
unto a city of Galilee named Nazareth
to a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph of the
house of David and the virgin s name was Mary.
and the angel came in unto her and said hail thou that art
highly favoured the lord is with thee blessed art thou among
women.
and when she saw him she was troubled at his saying and cast
in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.
and the angel said unto her fear not Mary for thou hast
found favour with God.
and behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb and bring forth
a son and shalt call his name Jesus.
he shall be great and shall be called the son of the highest
and the lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father
David
and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever and of
his kingdom there shall be no end.
then said Mary unto the angel how shall this be seeing I
know not a man?
and the angel answered and said unto her the holy ghost shall
come upon thee and the power of the highest shall overshadow
thee therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of
thee shall be called the son of God.
and behold thy cousin Elisabeth she hath also conceived a
son in her old age and this is the sixth month with her who
was called barren.
for with God nothing shall be impossible.
and Mary said behold the handmaid of the lord be it unto me
according to thy word. and the angel departed from her.
and Mary arose in those days and went into the hill country
with haste into a city of Juda
and entered into the house of Zacharias and saluted
Elisabeth.
and it came to pass that when Elisabeth heard the salutation
of Mary the babe leaped in her womb and Elisabeth was filled
with the holy ghost
and she spake out with a loud voice and said blessed art
thou among women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.
and whence is this to me that the mother of my lord should
come to me?
for lo as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in
mine ears the babe leaped in my womb for joy.
and blessed is she that believed for there shall be a
performance of those things which were told her from the lord.
and Mary said my soul doth magnify the lord
and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my saviour.
for he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden for
behold from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
for he that is Mighty hath done to me great things and holy
is his name.
and his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to
generation.
he hath shewed strength with his arm he hath scattered the
proud in the imagination of their hearts.
he hath put down the Mighty from their seats and exalted them
of low degree.
he hath filled the hungry with good things and the rich he
hath sent empty away.
he hath holpen his servant Israel in remembrance of his
mercy
as he spake to our fathers to Abraham and to his seed for
ever.
and Mary abode with her about three months and returned to
her own house.
now Elisabeth s full time came that she should be delivered
and she brought forth a son.
and her neighbours and her cousins heard how the lord had
shewed great mercy upon her and they rejoiced with her.
and it came to pass that on the eighth day they came to
circumcise the child and they called him Zacharias after the
name of his father.
and his mother answered and said not so but he shall be
called John.
and they said unto her there is none of thy kindred that is
called by this name.
and they made signs to his father how he would have him
called.
and he asked for a writing table and wrote saying his name
is John. and they marvelled all.
and his mouth was opened Immediately and his tongue loosed
and he spake and praised God.
and fear came on all that dwelt round about them and all
these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill
country of Judaea.
and all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts
saying what manner of child shall this be and the hand of
the lord was with him.
and his father Zacharias was filled with the holy ghost and
prophesied saying
blessed be the lord God of Israel for he hath visited and
redeemed his people
and hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of
his servant David
as he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets which have been
since the world began
that we should be saved from our enemies and from the hand of
all that hate us
to perform the mercy promised to our fathers and to remember
his holy covenant
the oath which he sware to our father Abraham
that he would grant unto us that we being delivered out of
the hand of our enemies might serve him without fear
in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life.
and thou child shalt be called the prophet of the highest
for thou shalt go before the face of the lord to prepare his
ways
to give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the
remission of their sins
through the tender mercy of our God whereby the dayspring
from on high hath visited us
to give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow
of death to guide our feet into the way of peace.
and the child grew and waxed strong in spirit and was in the
deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel.
and it came to pass in those days that there went out a
decree from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be
taxed.
 and this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was Governor of
Syria.
and all went to be taxed every one into his own city.
and Joseph also went up from Galilee out of the city of
Nazareth into Judaea unto the city of David which is called
Bethlehem because he was of the house and lineage of David
to be taxed with Mary his espoused wife being great with
child.
and so it was that while they were there the days were
accomplished that she should be delivered.
and she brought forth her firstborn son and wrapped him in
swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger because there was
no room for them in the inn.
and there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the
field keeping watch over their flock by night.
and lo the angel of the lord came upon them and the glory
of the lord shone round about them and they were sore afraid.
and the angel said unto them fear not for behold I bring
you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people.
for unto you is born this day in the city of David a saviour
which is Christ the lord.
and this shall be a sign unto you ye shall find the babe
wrapped in swaddling clothes lying in a manger.
and suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the
heavenly host praising God and saying
glory to God in the highest and on earth peace good will
toward men.
and it came to pass as the angels were gone away from them
into heaven the shepherds said one to another let us now go
even unto Bethlehem and see this thing which is come to pass
which the lord hath made known unto us.
and they came with haste and found Mary and Joseph and the
babe lying in a manger.
and when they had seen it they made known abroad the saying
which was told them concerning this child.
and all they that heard it wondered at those things which were
told them by the shepherds.
but Mary kept all these things and pondered them in her
heart.
and the shepherds returned glorifying and praising God for
all the things that they had heard and seen as it was told
unto them.
and when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of
the child his name was called Jesus which was so named of
the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
and when the days of her purification according to the law of
Moses were accomplished they brought him to Jerusalem to
present him to the lord
 as it is written in the law of the lord every Male that
openeth the womb shall be called holy to the lord
and to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in
the law of the lord a pair of turtledoves or two young
pigeons.
and behold there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was
Simeon and the same man was just and devout waiting for the
consolation of Israel and the holy ghost was upon him.
and it was revealed unto him by the holy ghost that he should
not see death before he had seen the lord s Christ.
and he came by the spirit into the temple and when the
parents brought in the child Jesus to do for him after the
custom of the law
then took he him up in his arms and blessed God and said
lord now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace according
to thy word
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation
which thou hast prepared before the face of all people
a light to lighten the Gentiles and the glory of thy people
Israel.
and Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were
spoken of him.
and Simeon blessed them and said unto Mary his mother
behold this child is set for the fall and rising again of
many in Israel and for a sign which shall be spoken against
 yea a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also that
the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.
and there was one Anna a prophetess the daughter of Phanuel
of the tribe of Aser she was of a great age and had lived
with an husband seven years from her virginity
and she was a widow of about fourscore and four years which
departed not from the temple but served God with fastings and
prayers night and day.
and she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the
lord and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption
in Jerusalem.
and when they had performed all things according to the law of
the lord they returned into Galilee to their own city
Nazareth.
and the child grew and waxed strong in spirit filled with
wisdom and the grace of God was upon him.
now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of
the passover.
and when he was twelve years old they went up to Jerusalem
after the custom of the feast.
and when they had fulfilled the days as they returned the
child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem and Joseph and his
mother knew not of it.
but they supposing him to have been in the company went a
day s journey and they sought him among their kinsfolk and
acquaintance.
and when they found him not they turned back again to
Jerusalem seeking him.
and it came to pass that after three days they found him in
the temple sitting in the midst of the doctors both hearing
them and asking them questions.
and all that heard him were astonished at his understanding
and answers.
and when they saw him they were amazed and his mother said
unto him son why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold thy
father and I have sought thee sorrowing.
and he said unto them how is it that ye sought me? wist ye
not that I must be about my father s business?
and they understood not the saying which he spake unto them.
and he went down with them and came to Nazareth and was
subject unto them but his mother kept all these sayings in
her heart.
and Jesus increased in wisdom and stature and in favour with
God and man.
now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar
Pontius Pilate being Governor of Judaea and Herod being
tetrarch of Galilee and his brother Philip tetrarch of
Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis and Lysanias the
tetrarch of Abilene
Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests the word of God
came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness.
and he came into all the country about Jordan preaching the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins
as it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the
prophet saying the voice of one crying in the wilderness
prepare ye the way of the lord make his paths straight.
every valley shall be filled and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low and the crooked shall be made straight
and the rough ways shall be made smooth
and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.
then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized
of him O generation of vipers who hath warned you to flee
from the wrath to come?
bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance and begin
not to say within yourselves we have Abraham to our father
for I say unto you that God is able of these stones to raise
up children unto Abraham.
and now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees every
tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn
down and cast into the fire.
and the people asked him saying what shall we do then?
he answereth and saith unto them he that hath two coats let
him impart to him that hath none and he that hath meat let
him do likewise.
then came also publicans to be baptized and said unto him
Master what shall we do?
and he said unto them exact no more than that which is
appointed you.
and the soldiers likewise demanded of him saying and what
shall we do? and he said unto them do violence to no man
Neither accuse any falsely and be content with your wages.
and as the people were in expectation and all men mused in
their hearts of John whether he were the Christ or not
John answered saying unto them all I indeed baptize you with
water but one mightier than I cometh the latchet of whose
shoes I Am not worthy to unloose he shall baptize you with
the holy ghost and with fire
whose fan is in his hand and he will throughly purge his
floor and will gather the wheat into his garner but the
chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable.
and many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the
people.
but Herod the tetrarch being reproved by him for Herodias his
brother Philip s wife and for all the evils which Herod had
done
added yet this above all that he shut up John in prison.
now when all the people were baptized it came to pass that
Jesus also being baptized and praying the heaven was opened
and the holy ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove
upon him and a voice came from heaven which said thou art
my beloved son in thee I Am well pleased.
and Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age being
 as was supposed the son of Joseph which was the son of
Heli
which was the son of Matthat which was the son of Levi which
was the son of Melchi which was the son of Janna which was
the son of Joseph
which was the son of Mattathias which was the son of Amos
which was the son of Naum which was the son of Esli which
was the son of Nagge
which was the son of Maath which was the son of Mattathias
which was the son of Semei which was the son of Joseph which
was the son of Juda
which was the son of Joanna which was the son of Rhesa which
was the son of Zorobabel which was the son of Salathiel
which was the son of Neri
which was the son of Melchi which was the son of Addi which
was the son of Cosam which was the son of Elmodam which was
the son of Er
which was the son of Jose which was the son of Eliezer which
was the son of Jorim which was the son of Matthat which was
the son of Levi
which was the son of Simeon which was the son of Juda which
was the son of Joseph which was the son of Jonan which was
the son of Eliakim
which was the son of Melea which was the son of Menan which
was the son of Mattatha which was the son of Nathan which
was the son of David
which was the son of Jesse which was the son of Obed which
was the son of Booz which was the son of Salmon which was
the son of Naasson
which was the son of Aminadab which was the son of Aram
which was the son of Esrom which was the son of Phares which
was the son of Juda
which was the son of Jacob which was the son of Isaac which
was the son of Abraham which was the son of Thara which was
the son of Nachor
which was the son of Saruch which was the son of Ragau which
was the son of Phalec which was the son of Heber which was
the son of Sala
which was the son of Cainan which was the son of Arphaxad
which was the son of Sem which was the son of Noe which was
the son of Lamech
which was the son of Mathusala which was the son of Enoch
which was the son of Jared which was the son of Maleleel
which was the son of Cainan
which was the son of Enos which was the son of Seth which
was the son of Adam which was the son of God.
and Jesus being full of the holy ghost returned from Jordan
and was led by the spirit into the wilderness
being forty days tempted of the devil. and in those days he
did eat nothing and when they were ended he afterward
hungered.
and the devil said unto him if thou be the son of God
command this stone that it be made bread.
and Jesus answered him saying it is written that man shall
not live by bread alone but by every word of God.
and the devil taking him up into an high mountain shewed
unto him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
and the devil said unto him all this power will I give thee
and the glory of them for that is delivered unto me and to
whomsoever I will I give it.
if thou therefore wilt worship me all shall be thine.
and Jesus answered and said unto him get thee behind me
Satan for it is written thou shalt worship the lord thy God
and him only shalt thou serve.
and he brought him to Jerusalem and set him on a pinnacle of
the temple and said unto him if thou be the son of God cast
thyself down from hence
for it is written he shall give his angels charge over thee
to keep thee
and in their hands they shall bear thee up lest at any time
thou dash thy foot against a stone.
and Jesus answering said unto him it is said thou shalt not
tempt the lord thy God.
and when the devil had ended all the temptation he departed
from him for a season.
and Jesus returned in the power of the spirit into Galilee
and there went out a fame of him through all the region round
about.
and he taught in their synagogues being glorified of all.
and he came to Nazareth where he had been brought up and as
his custom was he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day
and stood up for to read.
and there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet
Esaias. and when he had opened the book he found the place
where it was written
the spirit of the lord is upon me because he hath anointed me
to preach the gospel to the poor he hath sent me to heal the
brokenhearted to preach deliverance to the captives and
recovering of sight to the blind to set at liberty them that
are bruised
to preach the acceptable year of the lord.
and he closed the book and he gave it again to the minister
and sat down. and the eyes of all them that were in the
synagogue were fastened on him.
and he began to say unto them this day is this scripture
fulfilled in your ears.
and all bare him witness and wondered at the gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth. and they said is not this
Joseph s son?
and he said unto them ye will surely say unto me this
proverb Physician heal thyself whatsoever we have heard
done in Capernaum do also here in thy country.
and he said verily I say unto you no prophet is accepted in
his own country.
but I tell you of a truth many widows were in Israel in the
days of Elias when the heaven was shut up three years and six
months when great famine was throughout all the land
but unto none of them was Elias sent save unto Sarepta a
city of Sidon unto a woman that was a widow.
and many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the
prophet and none of them was cleansed saving Naaman the
Syrian.
and all they in the synagogue when they heard these things
were filled with wrath
and rose up and thrust him out of the city and led him unto
the brow of the hill whereon their city was built that they
might cast him down headlong.
but he passing through the midst of them went his way
and came down to Capernaum a city of Galilee and taught them
on the sabbath days.
and they were astonished at his doctrine for his word was
with power.
and in the synagogue there was a man which had a spirit of an
unclean devil and cried out with a loud voice
saying let us alone what have we to do with thee thou Jesus
of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou
art the holy one of God.
and Jesus rebuked him saying hold thy peace and come out of
him. and when the devil had thrown him in the midst he came
out of him and hurt him not.
and they were all amazed and spake among themselves saying
what a word is this for with authority and power he
commandeth the unclean spirits and they come out.
and the fame of him went out into every place of the country
round about.
and he arose out of the synagogue and entered into Simon s
house. and Simon s wife s mother was taken with a great fever
and they besought him for her.
and he stood over her and rebuked the fever and it left her
and Immediately she arose and ministered unto them.
now when the sun was setting all they that had any sick with
divers diseases brought them unto him and he laid his hands
on every one of them and healed them.
and devils also came out of many crying out and saying thou
art Christ the son of God. and he rebuking them suffered them
not to speak for they knew that he was Christ.
and when it was day he departed and went into a desert place
and the people sought him and came unto him and stayed him
that he should not depart from them.
and he said unto them I must preach the kingdom of God to
other cities also for therefore Am I sent.
and he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.
and it came to pass that as the people pressed upon him to
hear the word of God he stood by the lake of Gennesaret
and saw two ships standing by the lake but the fishermen were
gone out of them and were washing their nets.
and he entered into one of the ships which was Simon s and
prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land.
and he sat down and taught the people out of the ship.
now when he had left speaking he said unto Simon launch out
into the deep and let down your nets for a draught.
and Simon answering said unto him Master we have toiled all
the night and have taken nothing nevertheless at thy word I
will let down the net.
and when they had this done they inclosed a great multitude
of fishes and their net brake.
and they beckoned unto their partners which were in the other
ship that they should come and help them. and they came and
filled both the ships so that they began to sink.
when Simon Peter saw it he fell down at Jesus knees saying
depart from me for I Am a sinful man O lord.
for he was astonished and all that were with him at the
draught of the fishes which they had taken
and so was also James and John the sons of Zebedee which
were partners with Simon. and Jesus said unto Simon fear not
from henceforth thou shalt catch men.
and when they had brought their ships to land they forsook
all and followed him.
and it came to pass when he was in a certain city behold a
man full of leprosy who seeing Jesus fell on his face and
besought him saying lord if thou wilt thou canst make me
clean.
and he put forth his hand and touched him saying I will be
thou clean. and Immediately the leprosy departed from him.
and he charged him to tell no man but go and shew thyself to
the priest and offer for thy cleansing according as Moses
commanded for a testimony unto them.
but so Much the more went there a fame abroad of him and
great multitudes came together to hear and to be healed by
him of their infirmities.
and he withdrew himself into the wilderness and prayed.
and it came to pass on a certain day as he was teaching that
there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by which
were come out of every town of Galilee and Judaea and
Jerusalem and the power of the lord was present to heal them.
and behold men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a
palsy and they sought means to bring him in and to lay him
before him.
and when they could not find by what way they might bring him
in because of the multitude they went upon the housetop and
let him down through the tiling with his couch into the midst
before Jesus.
and when he saw their faith he said unto him man thy sins
are forgiven thee.
and the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason saying who
is this which speaketh blasphemies? who can forgive sins but
God alone?
but when Jesus perceived their thoughts he answering said
unto them what reason ye in your hearts?
whether is easier to say thy sins be forgiven thee or to
say rise up and walk?
but that ye may know that the son of man hath power upon earth
to forgive sins he said unto the sick of the palsy I say
unto thee Arise and take up thy couch and go into thine
house.
and Immediately he rose up before them and took up that
whereon he lay and departed to his own house glorifying God.
and they were all amazed and they glorified God and were
filled with fear saying we have seen strange things to day.
and after these things he went forth and saw a publican
named Levi sitting at the receipt of custom and he said unto
him follow me.
and he left all rose up and followed him.
and Levi made him a great feast in his own house and there
was a great company of publicans and of others that sat down
with them.
but their scribes and Pharisees murmured against his
disciples saying why do ye eat and drink with publicans and
sinners?
and Jesus answering said unto them they that are whole need
not a Physician but they that are sick.
I came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.
and they said unto him why do the disciples of John fast
often and make prayers and likewise the disciples of the
Pharisees but thine eat and drink?
and he said unto them can ye make the children of the
bridechamber fast while the bridegroom is with them?
but the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken
away from them and then shall they fast in those days.
and he spake also a parable unto them no man putteth a piece
of a new garment upon an old if otherwise then both the new
maketh a rent and the piece that was taken out of the new
agreeth not with the old.
and no man putteth new wine into old bottles else the new
wine will burst the bottles and be spilled and the bottles
shall perish.
but new wine must be put into new bottles and both are
preserved.
no man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new
for he saith the old is better.
and it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first
that he went through the corn fields and his disciples
plucked the ears of corn and did eat rubbing them in their
hands.
and certain of the Pharisees said unto them why do ye that
which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days?
and Jesus answering them said have ye not read so Much as
this what David did when himself was an hungred and they
which were with him
how he went into the house of God and did take and eat the
shewbread and gave also to them that were with him which it
is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone?
and he said unto them that the son of man is lord also of the
sabbath.
and it came to pass also on another sabbath that he entered
into the synagogue and taught and there was a man whose right
hand was withered.
and the scribes and Pharisees watched him whether he would
heal on the sabbath day that they might find an accusation
against him.
but he knew their thoughts and said to the man which had the
withered hand rise up and stand forth in the midst. and he
arose and stood forth.
then said Jesus unto them I will ask you one thing is it
lawful on the sabbath days to do good or to do evil? to save
life or to destroy it?
and looking round about upon them all he said unto the man
stretch forth thy hand. and he did so and his hand was
restored whole as the other.
and they were filled with madness and communed one with
another what they might do to Jesus.
and it came to pass in those days that he went out into a
mountain to pray and continued all night in prayer to God.
and when it was day he called unto him his disciples and of
them he chose twelve whom also he named apostles
Simon whom he also named Peter and Andrew his brother
James and John Philip and Bartholomew
Matthew and Thomas James the son of Alphaeus and Simon
called Zelotes
and Judas the brother of James and Judas Iscariot which also
was the traitor.
and he came down with them and stood in the plain and the
company of his disciples and a great multitude of people out
of all Judaea and Jerusalem and from the sea coast of Tyre
and Sidon which came to hear him and to be healed of their
diseases
and they that were vexed with unclean spirits and they were
healed.
and the whole multitude sought to touch him for there went
virtue out of him and healed them all.
and he lifted up his eyes on his disciples and said blessed
be ye poor for yours is the kingdom of God.
blessed are ye that hunger now for ye shall be filled.
blessed are ye that weep now for ye shall laugh.
blessed are ye when men shall hate you and when they shall
separate you from their company and shall reproach you and
cast out your name as evil for the son of man s sake.
rejoice ye in that day and leap for joy for behold your
reward is great in heaven for in the like manner did their
fathers unto the prophets.
but woe unto you that are rich for ye have received your
consolation.
woe unto you that are full for ye shall hunger. woe unto you
that laugh now for ye shall mourn and weep.
woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you for so did
their fathers to the false prophets.
but I say unto you which hear love your enemies do good to
them which hate you
bless them that curse you and pray for them which
despitefully use you.
and unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the
other and him that taketh away thy cloak forbid not to take
thy coat also.
give to every man that asketh of thee and of him that taketh
away thy goods ask them not again.
and as ye would that men should do to you do ye also to them
likewise.
for if ye love them which love you what thank have ye? for
sinners also love those that love them.
and if ye do good to them which do good to you what thank
have ye? for sinners also do even the same.
and if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive what thank
have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners to receive as Much
again.
but love ye your enemies and do good and lend hoping for
nothing again and your reward shall be great and ye shall be
the children of the highest for he is kind unto the
unthankful and to the evil.
be ye therefore merciful as your father also is merciful.
judge not and ye shall not be judged condemn not and ye
shall not be condemned forgive and ye shall be forgiven
give and it shall be given unto you good measure pressed
down and shaken together and running over shall men give
into your bosom. for with the same measure that ye mete withal
it shall be measured to you again.
and he spake a parable unto them can the blind lead the
blind? shall they not both fall into the ditch?
the disciple is not above his Master but every one that is
perfect shall be as his Master.
and why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother s eye
but perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
either how canst thou say to thy brother brother let me pull
out the mote that is in thine eye when thou thyself beholdest
not the beam that is in thine own eye? thou hypocrite cast
out first the beam out of thine own eye and then shalt thou
see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy brother s eye.
for a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit Neither doth
a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.
for every tree is known by his own fruit. for of thorns men do
not gather figs nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes.
a good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth
forth that which is good and an evil man out of the evil
treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is evil for
of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh.
and why call ye me lord lord and do not the things which I
say?
whosoever cometh to me and heareth my sayings and doeth
them I will shew you to whom he is like
he is like a man which built an house and digged deep and
laid the foundation on a rock and when the flood arose the
stream beat vehemently upon that house and could not shake
it for it was founded upon a rock.
but he that heareth and doeth not is like a man that without
a foundation built an house upon the earth against which the
stream did beat vehemently and Immediately it fell and the
ruin of that house was great.
now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the
people he entered into Capernaum.
and a certain centurion s servant who was dear unto him was
sick and ready to die.
and when he heard of Jesus he sent unto him the elders of the
Jews beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant.
and when they came to Jesus they besought him instantly
saying that he was worthy for whom he should do this
for he loveth our nation and he hath built us a synagogue.
then Jesus went with them. and when he was now not far from
the house the centurion sent friends to him saying unto him
lord trouble not thyself for I Am not worthy that thou
shouldest enter under my roof
wherefore Neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee
but say in a word and my servant shall be healed.
for I also Am a man set under authority having under me
soldiers and I say unto one go and he goeth and to
another come and he cometh and to my servant do this and
he doeth it.
when Jesus heard these things he marvelled at him and turned
him about and said unto the people that followed him I say
unto you I have not found so great faith no not in Israel.
and they that were sent returning to the house found the
servant whole that had been sick.
and it came to pass the day after that he went into a city
called Nain and many of his disciples went with him and Much
people.
now when he came nigh to the gate of the city behold there
was a dead man carried out the only son of his mother and
she was a widow and Much people of the city was with her.
and when the lord saw her he had compassion on her and said
unto her weep not.
and he came and touched the bier and they that bare him stood
still. and he said young man I say unto thee Arise.
and he that was dead sat up and began to speak. and he
delivered him to his mother.
and there came a fear on all and they glorified God saying
that a great prophet is risen up among us and that God hath
visited his people.
and this rumour of him went forth throughout all Judaea and
throughout all the region round about.
and the disciples of John shewed him of all these things.
and John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to
Jesus saying art thou he that should come? or look we for
another?
when the men were come unto him they said John Baptist hath
sent us unto thee saying art thou he that should come? or
look we for another?
and in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and
plagues and of evil spirits and unto many that were blind he
gave sight.
then Jesus answering said unto them go your way and tell
John what things ye have seen and heard how that the blind
see the lame walk the lepers are cleansed the deaf hear
the dead are raised to the poor the gospel is preached.
and blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.
and when the messengers of John were departed he began to
speak unto the people concerning John what went ye out into
the wilderness for to see? a reed shaken with the wind?
but what went ye out for to see? a man clothed in soft
raiment? behold they which are gorgeously apparelled and
live delicately are in kings courts.
but what went ye out for to see? a prophet? yea I say unto
you and Much more than a prophet.
this is he of whom it is written behold I send my messenger
before thy face which shall prepare thy way before thee.
for I say unto you among those that are born of women there
is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist but he that is
least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.
and all the people that heard him and the publicans
justified God being baptized with the baptism of John.
but the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God
against themselves being not baptized of him.
and the lord said whereunto then shall I liken the men of
this generation? and to what are they like?
they are like unto children sitting in the marketplace and
calling one to another and saying we have piped unto you
and ye have not danced we have mourned to you and ye have
not wept.
for John the Baptist came Neither eating bread nor drinking
wine and ye say he hath a devil.
the son of man is come eating and drinking and ye say behold
a gluttonous man and a winebibber a friend of publicans and
sinners
but wisdom is justified of all her children.
and one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with
him. and he went into the Pharisee s house and sat down to
meat.
and behold a woman in the city which was a sinner when she
knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee s house brought
an alabaster box of ointment
and stood at his feet behind him weeping and began to wash
his feet with tears and did wipe them with the hairs of her
head and kissed his feet and anointed them with the
ointment.
now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it he spake
within himself saying this man if he were a prophet would
have known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth
him for she is a sinner.
and Jesus answering said unto him Simon I have somewhat to
say unto thee. and he saith Master say on.
there was a certain creditor which had two debtors the one
owed five hundred pence and the other fifty.
and when they had nothing to pay he frankly forgave them
both. tell me therefore which of them will love him most?
Simon answered and said I suppose that he to whom he forgave
most. and he said unto him thou hast rightly judged.
and he turned to the woman and said unto Simon seest thou
this woman? I entered into thine house thou Gavest me no
water for my feet but she hath washed my feet with tears and
wiped them with the hairs of her head.
thou Gavest me no Kiss but this woman since the time I came
in hath not ceased to Kiss my feet.
my head with oil thou didst not anoint but this woman hath
anointed my feet with ointment.
wherefore I say unto thee her sins which are many are
forgiven for she loved Much but to whom little is forgiven
the same loveth little.
and he said unto her thy sins are forgiven.
and they that sat at meat with him began to say within
themselves who is this that forgiveth sins also?
and he said to the woman thy faith hath saved thee go in
peace.
and it came to pass afterward that he went throughout every
city and village preaching and shewing the glad tidings of
the kingdom of God and the twelve were with him
and certain women which had been healed of evil spirits and
infirmities Mary called Magdalene out of whom went seven
devils
and Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod s steward and Susanna and
many others which ministered unto him of their substance.
and when Much people were gathered together and were come to
him out of every city he spake by a parable
a sower went out to sow his seed and as he sowed some fell
by the way side and it was trodden down and the fowls of the
air devoured it.
and some fell upon a rock and as soon as it was sprung up it
withered away because it lacked moisture.
and some fell among thorns and the thorns sprang up with it
and choked it.
and other fell on good ground and sprang up and bare fruit
an hundredfold. and when he had said these things he cried
he that hath ears to hear let him hear.
and his disciples asked him saying what might this parable
be?
and he said unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God but to others in parables that seeing they
might not see and hearing they might not understand.
now the parable is this the seed is the word of God.
those by the way side are they that hear then cometh the
devil and taketh away the word out of their hearts lest they
should believe and be saved.
they on the rock are they which when they hear receive the
word with joy and these have no root which for a while
believe and in time of temptation fall away.
and that which fell among thorns are they which when they
have heard go forth and are choked with cares and Riches and
pleasures of this life and bring no fruit to perfection.
but that on the good ground are they which in an honest and
good heart having heard the word keep it and bring forth
fruit with patience.
no man when he hath lighted a candle covereth it with a
vessel or putteth it under a bed but setteth it on a
candlestick that they which enter in may see the light.
for nothing is secret that shall not be made manifest
Neither any thing hid that shall not be known and come
abroad.
take heed therefore how ye hear for whosoever hath to him
shall be given and whosoever hath not from him shall be
taken even that which he seemeth to have.
then came to him his mother and his brethren and could not
come at him for the press.
and it was told him by certain which said thy mother and thy
brethren stand without desiring to see thee.
and he answered and said unto them my mother and my brethren
are these which hear the word of God and do it.
now it came to pass on a certain day that he went into a ship
with his disciples and he said unto them let us go over unto
the other side of the lake. and they launched forth.
but as they sailed he fell asleep and there came down a storm
of wind on the lake and they were filled with water and were
in jeopardy.
and they came to him and awoke him saying Master Master
we perish. then he arose and rebuked the wind and the raging
of the water and they ceased and there was a calm.
and he said unto them where is your faith? and they being
afraid wondered saying one to another what manner of man is
this for he commandeth even the winds and water and they
obey him.
and they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes which is
over against Galilee.
and when he went forth to land there met him out of the city
a certain man which had devils long time and ware no
clothes Neither abode in any house but in the tombs.
when he saw Jesus he cried out and fell down before him and
with a loud voice said what have I to do with thee Jesus
thou son of God most high? I beseech thee torment me not.
 for he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the
man. for oftentimes it had caught him and he was kept bound
with chains and in fetters and he brake the Bands and was
driven of the devil into the wilderness.
and Jesus asked him saying what is thy name? and he said
legion because many devils were entered into him.
and they besought him that he would not command them to go out
into the deep.
and there was there an herd of many swine feeding on the
mountain and they besought him that he would suffer them to
enter into them. and he suffered them.
then went the devils out of the man and entered into the
swine and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the
lake and were choked.
when they that fed them saw what was done they fled and went
and told it in the city and in the country.
then they went out to see what was done and came to Jesus
and found the man out of whom the devils were departed
sitting at the feet of Jesus clothed and in his right mind
and they were afraid.
they also which saw it told them by what means he that was
possessed of the devils was healed.
then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round
about besought him to depart from them for they were taken
with great fear and he went up into the ship and returned
back again.
now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him
that he might be with him but Jesus sent him away saying
return to thine own house and shew how great things God hath
done unto thee. and he went his way and published throughout
the whole city how great things Jesus had done unto him.
and it came to pass that when Jesus was returned the people
gladly received him for they were all waiting for him.
and behold there came a man named Jairus and he was a ruler
of the synagogue and he fell down at Jesus feet and
besought him that he would come into his house
for he had one only daughter about twelve years of age and
she lay a dying. but as he went the people thronged him.
and a woman having an issue of blood twelve years which had
spent all her living upon physicians Neither could be healed
of any
came behind him and touched the border of his garment and
Immediately her issue of blood stanched.
and Jesus said who touched me? when all denied Peter and
they that were with him said Master the multitude throng
thee and press thee and sayest thou who touched me?
and Jesus said somebody hath touched me for I perceive that
virtue is gone out of me.
and when the woman saw that she was not hid she came
trembling and falling down before him she declared unto him
before all the people for what cause she had touched him and
how she was healed Immediately.
and he said unto her daughter be of good comfort thy faith
hath made thee whole go in peace.
while he yet spake there cometh one from the ruler of the
synagogue s house saying to him thy daughter is dead
trouble not the Master.
but when Jesus heard it he answered him saying fear not
believe only and she shall be made whole.
and when he came into the house he suffered no man to go in
save Peter and James and John and the father and the mother
of the maiden.
and all wept and bewailed her but he said weep not she is
not dead but sleepeth.
and they laughed him to scorn knowing that she was dead.
and he put them all out and took her by the hand and called
saying maid Arise.
and her spirit came again and she arose straightway and he
commanded to give her meat.
and her parents were astonished but he charged them that they
should tell no man what was done.
then he called his twelve disciples together and gave them
power and authority over all devils and to cure diseases.
and he sent them to preach the kingdom of God and to heal the
sick.
and he said unto them take nothing for your journey Neither
staves nor scrip Neither bread Neither money Neither have
two coats apiece.
and whatsoever house ye enter into there abide and thence
depart.
and whosoever will not receive you when ye go out of that
city shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony
against them.
and they departed and went through the towns preaching the
gospel and healing every where.
now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him and
he was perplexed because that it was said of some that John
was risen from the dead
and of some that Elias had appeared and of others that one
of the old prophets was risen again.
and Herod said John have I beheaded but who is this of whom
I hear such things? and he desired to see him.
and the apostles when they were returned told him all that
they had done. and he took them and went aside privately into
a desert place belonging to the city called Bethsaida.
and the people when they knew it followed him and he
received them and spake unto them of the kingdom of God and
healed them that had need of healing.
and when the day began to wear away then came the twelve and
said unto him send the multitude away that they may go into
the towns and country round about and lodge and get
victuals for we are here in a desert place.
but he said unto them give ye them to eat. and they said we
have no more but five loaves and two fishes except we should
go and buy meat for all this people.
for they were about five thousand men. and he said to his
disciples make them sit down by fifties in a company.
and they did so and made them all sit down.
then he took the five loaves and the two fishes and looking
up to heaven he blessed them and brake and gave to the
disciples to set before the multitude.
and they did eat and were all filled and there was taken up
of fragments that remained to them twelve baskets.
and it came to pass as he was alone praying his disciples
were with him and he asked them saying whom say the people
that I Am?
they answering said John the Baptist but some say Elias
and others say that one of the old prophets is risen again.
he said unto them but whom say ye that I Am? Peter answering
said the Christ of God.
and he straitly charged them and commanded them to tell no
man that thing
saying the son of man must suffer many things and be
rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes and be
slain and be raised the third day.
and he said to them all if any man will come after me let
him deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow me.
for whosoever will save his life shall lose it but whosoever
will lose his life for my sake the same shall save it.
for what is a man advantaged if he gain the whole world and
lose himself or be cast away?
for whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words of him
shall the son of man be ashamed when he shall come in his own
glory and in his father s and of the holy angels.
but I tell you of a truth there be some standing here which
shall not taste of death till they see the kingdom of God.
and it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings
he took Peter and John and James and went up into a mountain
to pray.
and as he prayed the fashion of his countenance was altered
and his raiment was white and glistering.
and behold there talked with him two men which were Moses
and Elias
who appeared in glory and spake of his decease which he
should accomplish at Jerusalem.
but Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep
and when they were awake they saw his glory and the two men
that stood with him.
and it came to pass as they departed from him Peter said
unto Jesus Master it is good for us to be here and let us
make three tabernacles one for thee and one for Moses and
one for Elias not knowing what he said.
while he thus spake there came a cloud and overshadowed
them and they feared as they entered into the cloud.
and there came a voice out of the cloud saying this is my
beloved son hear him.
and when the voice was past Jesus was found alone. and they
kept it close and told no man in those days any of those
things which they had seen.
and it came to pass that on the next day when they were come
down from the hill Much people met him.
and behold a man of the company cried out saying Master I
beseech thee look upon my son for he is mine only child.
and lo a spirit taketh him and he suddenly crieth out and
it teareth him that he foameth again and bruising him hardly
departeth from him.
and I besought thy disciples to cast him out and they could
not.
and Jesus answering said O faithless and perverse generation
how long shall I be with you and suffer you? bring thy son
hither.
and as he was yet a coming the devil threw him down and tare
him. and Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and healed the
child and delivered him again to his father.
and they were all amazed at the Mighty power of God. but while
they wondered every one at all things which Jesus did he said
unto his disciples
let these sayings sink down into your ears for the son of man
shall be delivered into the hands of men.
but they understood not this saying and it was hid from them
that they perceived it not and they feared to ask him of that
saying.
then there arose a reasoning among them which of them should
be greatest.
and Jesus perceiving the thought of their heart took a
child and set him by him
and said unto them whosoever shall receive this child in my
name receiveth me and whosoever shall receive me receiveth
him that sent me for he that is least among you all the same
shall be great.
and John answered and said Master we saw one casting out
devils in thy name and we forbad him because he followeth
not with us.
and Jesus said unto him forbid him not for he that is not
against us is for us.
and it came to pass when the time was come that he should be
received up he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem
and sent messengers before his face and they went and
entered into a village of the Samaritans to make ready for
him.
and they did not receive him because his face was as though
he would go to Jerusalem.
and when his disciples James and John saw this they said
lord wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven
and consume them even as Elias did?
but he turned and rebuked them and said ye know not what
manner of spirit ye are of.
for the son of man is not come to destroy men s lives but to
save them. and they went to another village.
and it came to pass that as they went in the way a certain
man said unto him lord I will follow thee whithersoever thou
goest.
and Jesus said unto him foxes have holes and birds of the
air have nests but the son of man hath not where to lay his
head.
and he said unto another follow me. but he said lord suffer
me first to go and bury my father.
Jesus said unto him let the dead bury their dead but go thou
and preach the kingdom of God.
and another also said lord I will follow thee but let me
first go bid them farewell which are at home at my house.
and Jesus said unto him no man having put his hand to the
plough and looking back is fit for the kingdom of God.
after these things the lord appointed other seventy also and
sent them two and two before his face into every city and
place whither he himself would come.
therefore said he unto them the harvest truly is great but
the labourers are few pray ye therefore the lord of the
harvest that he would send forth labourers into his harvest.
go your ways behold I send you forth as lambs among wolves.
carry Neither purse nor scrip nor shoes and salute no man
by the way.
and into whatsoever house ye enter first say peace be to
this house.
and if the son of peace be there your peace shall rest upon
it if not it shall turn to you again.
and in the same house remain eating and drinking such things
as they give for the labourer is worthy of his hire. go not
from house to house.
and into whatsoever city ye enter and they receive you eat
such things as are set before you
and heal the sick that are therein and say unto them the
kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.
but into whatsoever city ye enter and they receive you not
go your ways out into the streets of the same and say
even the very dust of your city which cleaveth on us we do
wipe off against you notwithstanding be ye sure of this that
the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.
but I say unto you that it shall be more tolerable in that
day for Sodom than for that city.
woe unto thee Chorazin woe unto thee Bethsaida for if the
Mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which have been
done in you they had a great while ago repented sitting in
sackcloth and ashes.
but it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the
judgment than for you.
and thou Capernaum which art exalted to heaven shalt be
thrust down to hell.
he that heareth you heareth me and he that despiseth you
despiseth me and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent
me.
and the seventy returned again with joy saying lord even
the devils are subject unto us through thy name.
and he said unto them I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
heaven.
behold I give unto you power to tread on serpents and
scorpions and over all the power of the enemy and nothing
shall by any means hurt you.
notwithstanding in this rejoice not that the spirits are
subject unto you but rather rejoice because your names are
written in heaven.
in that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit and said I thank thee
O father lord of heaven and earth that thou hast hid these
things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto
babes even so father for so it seemed good in thy sight.
all things are delivered to me of my father and no man
knoweth who the son is but the father and who the father is
but the son and he to whom the son will reveal him.
and he turned him unto his disciples and said privately
blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see
for I tell you that many prophets and kings have desired to
see those things which ye see and have not seen them and to
hear those things which ye hear and have not heard them.
and behold a certain lawyer stood up and tempted him
saying Master what shall I do to inherit eternal life?
he said unto him what is written in the law? how readest
thou?
and he answering said thou shalt love the lord thy God with
all thy heart and with all thy soul and with all thy
strength and with all thy mind and thy neighbour as thyself.
and he said unto him thou hast answered right this do and
thou shalt live.
but he willing to justify himself said unto Jesus and who
is my neighbour?
and Jesus answering said a certain man went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among thieves which stripped
him of his raiment and wounded him and departed leaving him
half dead.
and by chance there came down a certain priest that way and
when he saw him he passed by on the other side.
and likewise a Levite when he was at the place came and
looked on him and passed by on the other side.
but a certain Samaritan as he journeyed came where he was
and when he saw him he had compassion on him
and went to him and bound up his wounds pouring in oil and
wine and set him on his own beast and brought him to an inn
and took care of him.
and on the morrow when he departed he took out two pence and
gave them to the host and said unto him take care of him
and whatsoever thou spendest more when I come again I will
repay thee.
which now of these three thinkest thou was neighbour unto
him that fell among the thieves?
and he said he that shewed mercy on him. then said Jesus unto
him go and do thou likewise.
now it came to pass as they went that he entered into a
certain village and a certain woman named Martha received him
into her house.
and she had a sister called Mary which also sat at Jesus
feet and heard his word.
but Martha was cumbered about Much serving and came to him
and said lord dost thou not care that my sister hath left me
to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me.
and Jesus answered and said unto her Martha Martha thou art
careful and troubled about many things
but one thing is needful and Mary hath chosen that good part
which shall not be taken away from her.
and it came to pass that as he was praying in a certain
place when he ceased one of his disciples said unto him
lord teach us to pray as John also taught his disciples.
and he said unto them when ye pray say our father which art
in heaven hallowed be thy name. thy kingdom come. thy will be
done as in heaven so in earth.
give us day by day our daily bread.
and forgive us our sins for we also forgive every one that is
indebted to us. and lead us not into temptation but deliver
us from evil.
and he said unto them which of you shall have a friend and
shall go unto him at midnight and say unto him friend lend
me three loaves
for a friend of mine in his journey is come to me and I have
nothing to set before him?
and he from within shall answer and say trouble me not the
door is now shut and my children are with me in bed I cannot
rise and give thee.
I say unto you though he will not rise and give him because
he is his friend yet because of his importunity he will rise
and give him as many as he needeth.
and I say unto you ask and it shall be given you seek and
ye shall find knock and it shall be opened unto you.
for every one that asketh receiveth and he that seeketh
findeth and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.
if a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father will
he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish will he for a fish
give him a serpent?
or if he shall ask an egg will he offer him a scorpion?
if ye then being evil know how to give good gifts unto your
children how Much more shall your heavenly father give the
holy spirit to them that ask him?
and he was casting out a devil and it was dumb. and it came
to pass when the devil was gone out the dumb spake and the
people wondered.
but some of them said he casteth out devils through Beelzebub
the chief of the devils.
and others tempting him sought of him a sign from heaven.
but he knowing their thoughts said unto them every kingdom
divided against itself is brought to desolation and a house
divided against a house falleth.
if Satan also be divided against himself how shall his
kingdom stand? because ye say that I cast out devils through
Beelzebub.
and if I by Beelzebub cast out devils by whom do your sons
cast them out? therefore shall they be your judges.
but if I with the finger of God cast out devils no doubt the
kingdom of God is come upon you.
when a strong man armed keepeth his palace his goods are in
peace
but when a stronger than he shall come upon him and overcome
him he taketh from him all his armour wherein he trusted and
divideth his spoils.
he that is not with me is against me and he that gathereth
not with me scattereth.
when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man he walketh
through dry places seeking rest and finding none he saith
I will return unto my house whence I came out.
and when he cometh he findeth it swept and garnished.
then goeth he and taketh to him seven other spirits more
wicked than himself and they enter in and dwell there and
the last state of that man is worse than the first.
and it came to pass as he spake these things a certain woman
of the company lifted up her voice and said unto him blessed
is the womb that bare thee and the paps which thou hast
sucked.
but he said yea rather blessed are they that hear the word
of God and keep it.
and when the people were gathered thick together he began to
say this is an evil generation they seek a sign and there
shall no sign be given it but the sign of Jonas the prophet.
for as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites so shall also the
son of man be to this generation.
the queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the
men of this generation and condemn them for she came from
the utmost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon
and behold a greater than Solomon is here.
the men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this
generation and shall condemn it for they repented at the
preaching of Jonas and behold a greater than Jonas is here.
no man when he hath lighted a candle putteth it in a secret
place Neither under a bushel but on a candlestick that they
which come in may see the light.
the light of the body is the eye therefore when thine eye is
single thy whole body also is full of light but when thine
eye is evil thy body also is full of darkness.
take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not
darkness.
if thy whole body therefore be full of light having no part
dark the whole shall be full of light as when the bright
shining of a candle doth give thee light.
and as he spake a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with
him and he went in and sat down to meat.
and when the Pharisee saw it he marvelled that he had not
first washed before dinner.
and the lord said unto him now do ye Pharisees make clean the
outside of the cup and the platter but your inward part is
full of ravening and wickedness.
ye fools did not he that made that which is without make that
which is within also?
but rather give alms of such things as ye have and behold
all things are clean unto you.
but woe unto you Pharisees for ye tithe mint and rue and all
manner of herbs and pass over judgment and the love of God
these ought ye to have done and not to leave the other
undone.
woe unto you Pharisees for ye love the uppermost seats in
the synagogues and greetings in the markets.
woe unto you scribes and Pharisees hypocrites for ye are as
graves which appear not and the men that walk over them are
not aware of them.
then answered one of the lawyers and said unto him Master
thus saying thou reproachest us also.
and he said woe unto you also ye lawyers for ye lade men
with burdens grievous to be borne and ye yourselves touch not
the burdens with one of your fingers.
woe unto you for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets and
your fathers killed them.
truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers
for they indeed killed them and ye build their sepulchres.
therefore also said the wisdom of God I will send them
prophets and apostles and some of them they shall slay and
persecute
that the blood of all the prophets which was shed from the
foundation of the world may be required of this generation
from the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias which
perished between the altar and the temple verily I say unto
you it shall be required of this generation.
woe unto you lawyers for ye have taken away the key of
knowledge ye entered not in yourselves and them that were
entering in ye hindered.
and as he said these things unto them the scribes and the
Pharisees began to urge him vehemently and to provoke him to
speak of many things
laying wait for him and seeking to catch something out of his
mouth that they might accuse him.
in the mean time when there were gathered together an
innumerable multitude of people insomuch that they trode one
upon another he began to say unto his disciples first of all
beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy.
for there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed
Neither hid that shall not be known.
therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard
in the light and that which ye have spoken in the ear in
closets shall be proclaimed upon the housetops.
and I say unto you my friends be not afraid of them that kill
the body and after that have no more that they can do.
but I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear fear him which
after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell yea I say
unto you fear him.
are not five sparrows sold for two farthings and not one of
them is forgotten before God?
but even the very hairs of your head are all numbered. fear
not therefore ye are of more value than many sparrows.
also I say unto you whosoever shall confess me before men
him shall the son of man also confess before the angels of
God
but he that denieth me before men shall be denied before the
angels of God.
and whosoever shall speak a word against the son of man it
shall be forgiven him but unto him that blasphemeth against
the holy ghost it shall not be forgiven.
and when they bring you unto the synagogues and unto
magistrates and powers take ye no thought how or what thing
ye shall answer or what ye shall say
for the holy ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye
ought to say.
and one of the company said unto him Master speak to my
brother that he divide the inheritance with me.
and he said unto him man who made me a judge or a divider
over you?
and he said unto them take heed and beware of covetousness
for a man s life consisteth not in the abundance of the things
which he possesseth.
and he spake a parable unto them saying the ground of a
certain rich man brought forth plentifully
and he thought within himself saying what shall I do
because I have no room where to bestow my fruits?
and he said this will I do I will pull down my barns and
build greater and there will I bestow all my fruits and my
goods.
and I will say to my soul soul thou hast Much goods laid up
for many years take thine ease eat drink and be merry.
but God said unto him thou fool this night thy soul shall be
required of thee then whose shall those things be which thou
hast provided?
so is he that layeth up treasure for himself and is not rich
toward God.
and he said unto his disciples therefore I say unto you take
no thought for your life what ye shall eat Neither for the
body what ye shall put on.
the life is more than meat and the body is more than raiment.
consider the ravens for they Neither sow nor reap which
Neither have storehouse nor barn and God feedeth them how
Much more are ye better than the fowls?
and which of you with taking thought can add to his stature
one cubit?
if ye then be not able to do that thing which is least why
take ye thought for the rest?
consider the lilies how they grow they toil not they spin
not and yet I say unto you that Solomon in all his glory was
not arrayed like one of these.
if then God so clothe the grass which is to day in the field
and to morrow is cast into the oven how Much more will he
clothe you O ye of little faith?
and seek not ye what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink
Neither be ye of doubtful mind.
for all these things do the nations of the world seek after
and your father knoweth that ye have need of these things.
but rather seek ye the kingdom of God and all these things
shall be added unto you.
fear not little flock for it is your father s good pleasure
to give you the kingdom.
sell that ye have and give alms provide yourselves bags
which wax not old a treasure in the heavens that faileth not
where no thief approacheth Neither moth corrupteth.
for where your treasure is there will your heart be also.
let your loins be girded about and your lights burning
and ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord when
he will return from the wedding that when he cometh and
knocketh they may open unto him Immediately.
blessed are those servants whom the lord when he cometh shall
find watching verily I say unto you that he shall gird
himself and make them to sit down to meat and will come
forth and serve them.
and if he shall come in the second watch or come in the third
watch and find them so blessed are those servants.
and this know that if the goodman of the house had known what
hour the thief would come he would have watched and not have
suffered his house to be broken through.
be ye therefore ready also for the son of man cometh at an
hour when ye think not.
then Peter said unto him lord speakest thou this parable
unto us or even to all?
and the lord said who then is that faithful and wise steward
whom his lord shall make ruler over his household to give
them their portion of meat in due season?
blessed is that servant whom his lord when he cometh shall
find so doing.
of a truth I say unto you that he will make him ruler over
all that he hath.
but and if that servant say in his heart my lord delayeth his
coming and shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens
and to eat and drink and to be drunken
the lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh
not for him and at an hour when he is not aware and will cut
him in sunder and will appoint him his portion with the
unbelievers.
and that servant which knew his lord s will and prepared not
himself Neither did according to his will shall be beaten
with many stripes.
but he that knew not and did commit things worthy of stripes
shall be beaten with few stripes. for unto whomsoever Much is
given of him shall be Much required and to whom men have
committed Much of him they will ask the more.
I Am come to send fire on the earth and what will I if it be
already kindled?
but I have a baptism to be baptized with and how Am I
straitened till it be accomplished
suppose ye that I Am come to give peace on earth? I tell you
nay but rather division
for from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided
three against two and two against three.
the father shall be divided against the son and the son
against the father the mother against the daughter and the
daughter against the mother the mother in law against her
daughter in law and the daughter in law against her mother in
law.
and he said also to the people when ye see a cloud rise out
of the west straightway ye say there cometh a shower and so
it is.
and when ye see the south wind blow ye say there will be
heat and it cometh to pass.
ye hypocrites ye can discern the face of the sky and of the
earth but how is it that ye do not discern this time?
yea and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?
when thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate as
thou art in the way give diligence that thou mayest be
delivered from him lest he hale thee to the judge and the
judge deliver thee to the officer and the officer cast thee
into prison.
I tell thee thou shalt not depart thence till thou hast paid
the very last mite.
there were present at that season some that told him of the
Galilaeans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their
sacrifices.
and Jesus answering said unto them suppose ye that these
Galilaeans were sinners above all the Galilaeans because they
suffered such things?
I tell you nay but except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish.
or those eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloam fell and
slew them think ye that they were sinners above all men that
dwelt in Jerusalem?
I tell you nay but except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish.
he spake also this parable a certain man had a fig tree
planted in his vineyard and he came and sought fruit thereon
and found none.
then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard behold these
three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree and find
none cut it down why cumbereth it the ground?
and he answering said unto him lord let it alone this year
also till I shall dig about it and dung it
and if it bear fruit well and if not then after that thou
shalt cut it down.
and he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath.
and behold there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years and was bowed together and could in no wise
lift up herself.
and when Jesus saw her he called her to him and said unto
her woman thou art loosed from thine infirmity.
and he laid his hands on her and Immediately she was made
straight and glorified God.
and the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation
because that Jesus had healed on the sabbath day and said
unto the people there are six days in which men ought to
work in them therefore come and be healed and not on the
sabbath day.
the lord then answered him and said thou hypocrite doth not
each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from
the stall and lead him away to watering?
and ought not this woman being a daughter of Abraham whom
Satan hath bound lo these eighteen years be loosed from
this bond on the sabbath day?
and when he had said these things all his adversaries were
ashamed and all the people rejoiced for all the glorious
things that were done by him.
then said he unto what is the kingdom of God like? and
whereunto shall I resemble it?
it is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and cast
into his garden and it grew and waxed a great tree and the
fowls of the air lodged in the branches of it.
and again he said whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God?
it is like leaven which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal till the whole was leavened.
and he went through the cities and villages teaching and
journeying toward Jerusalem.
then said one unto him lord are there few that be saved? and
he said unto them
strive to enter in at the strait gate for many I say unto
you will seek to enter in and shall not be able.
when once the Master of the house is risen up and hath shut
to the door and ye begin to stand without and to knock at
the door saying lord lord open unto us and he shall
answer and say unto you I know you not whence ye are
then shall ye begin to say we have eaten and drunk in thy
presence and thou hast taught in our streets.
but he shall say I tell you I know you not whence ye are
depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth when ye shall
see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in
the kingdom of God and you yourselves thrust out.
and they shall come from the east and from the west and from
the north and from the south and shall sit down in the
kingdom of God.
and behold there are last which shall be first and there
are first which shall be last.
the same day there came certain of the Pharisees saying unto
him get thee out and depart hence for Herod will kill thee.
and he said unto them go ye and tell that fox behold I
cast out devils and I do cures to day and to morrow and the
third day I shall be perfected.
nevertheless I must walk to day and to morrow and the day
following for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of
Jerusalem.
O Jerusalem Jerusalem which killest the prophets and
stonest them that are sent unto thee how often would I have
gathered thy children together as a Hen doth gather her brood
under her wings and ye would not
behold your house is left unto you desolate and verily I say
unto you ye shall not see me until the time come when ye
shall say blessed is he that cometh in the name of the lord.
and it came to pass as he went into the house of one of the
chief Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath day that they
watched him.
and behold there was a certain man before him which had the
dropsy.
and Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees
saying is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?
and they held their peace. and he took him and healed him
and let him go
and answered them saying which of you shall have an ass or
an ox fallen into a pit and will not straightway pull him out
on the sabbath day?
and they could not answer him again to these things.
and he put forth a parable to those which were bidden when he
marked how they chose out the chief rooms saying unto them.
when thou art bidden of any man to a wedding sit not down in
the highest room lest a more honourable man than thou be
bidden of him
and he that bade thee and him come and say to thee give this
man place and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room.
but when thou art bidden go and sit down in the lowest room
that when he that bade thee cometh he may say unto thee
friend go up higher then shalt thou have worship in the
presence of them that sit at meat with thee.
for whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased and he that
humbleth himself shall be exalted.
then said he also to him that bade him when thou makest a
dinner or a supper call not thy friends nor thy brethren
Neither thy kinsmen nor thy rich neighbours lest they also
bid thee again and a recompence be made thee.
but when thou makest a feast call the poor the maimed the
lame the blind
and thou shalt be blessed for they cannot recompense thee
for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.
and when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these
things he said unto him blessed is he that shall eat bread
in the kingdom of God.
then said he unto him a certain man made a great supper and
bade many
and sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were
bidden come for all things are now ready.
and they all with one consent began to make excuse. the first
said unto him I have bought a piece of ground and I must
needs go and see it I pray thee have me excused.
and another said I have bought five yoke of oxen and I go to
prove them I pray thee have me excused.
and another said I have married a wife and therefore I
cannot come.
so that servant came and shewed his lord these things. then
the Master of the house being angry said to his servant go
out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city and bring
in hither the poor and the maimed and the halt and the
blind.
and the servant said lord it is done as thou hast commanded
and yet there is room.
and the lord said unto the servant go out into the highways
and hedges and compel them to come in that my house may be
filled.
for I say unto you that none of those men which were bidden
shall taste of my supper.
and there went great multitudes with him and he turned and
said unto them
if any man come to me and hate not his father and mother
and wife and children and brethren and sisters yea and
his own life also he cannot be my disciple.
and whosoever doth not bear his cross and come after me
cannot be my disciple.
for which of you intending to build a tower sitteth not down
first and counteth the cost whether he have sufficient to
finish it?
lest haply after he hath laid the foundation and is not able
to finish it all that behold it begin to mock him
saying this man began to build and was not able to finish.
or what king going to make war against another king sitteth
not down first and consulteth whether he be able with Ten
thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty
thousand?
or else while the other is yet a great way off he sendeth an
ambassage and desireth conditions of peace.
so likewise whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all
that he hath he cannot be my disciple.
salt is good but if the salt have lost his savour wherewith
shall it be seasoned?
it is Neither fit for the land nor yet for the dunghill but
men cast it out. he that hath ears to hear let him hear.
then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to
hear him.
and the Pharisees and scribes murmured saying this man
receiveth sinners and eateth with them.
and he spake this parable unto them saying
what man of you having an hundred sheep if he lose one of
them doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness
and go after that which is lost until he find it?
and when he hath found it he layeth it on his shoulders
rejoicing.
and when he cometh home he calleth together his friends and
neighbours saying unto them rejoice with me for I have
found my sheep which was lost.
I say unto you that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one
sinner that repenteth more than over ninety and nine just
persons which need no repentance.
either what woman having Ten pieces of Silver if she lose one
piece doth not light a candle and sweep the house and seek
diligently till she find it?
and when she hath found it she calleth her friends and her
neighbours together saying rejoice with me for I have found
the piece which I had lost.
likewise I say unto you there is joy in the presence of the
angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.
and he said a certain man had two sons
and the younger of them said to his father father give me
the portion of goods that falleth to me. and he divided unto
them his living.
and not many days after the younger son gathered all together
and took his journey into a far country and there wasted his
substance with riotous living.
and when he had spent all there arose a Mighty famine in that
land and he began to be in want.
and he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country
and he sent him into his fields to feed swine.
and he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that
the swine did eat and no man gave unto him.
and when he came to himself he said how many hired servants
of my father s have bread enough and to spare and I perish
with hunger
I will Arise and go to my father and will say unto him
father I have sinned against heaven and before thee
and Am no more worthy to be called thy son make me as one of
thy hired servants.
and he arose and came to his father. but when he was yet a
great way off his father saw him and had compassion and
ran and fell on his neck and kissed him.
and the son said unto him father I have sinned against
heaven and in thy sight and Am no more worthy to be called
thy son.
but the father said to his servants bring forth the best
robe and put it on him and put a ring on his hand and shoes
on his feet
and bring hither the fatted calf and kill it and let us eat
and be merry
for this my son was dead and is alive again he was lost and
is found. and they began to be merry.
now his elder son was in the field and as he came and drew
nigh to the house he heard musick and dancing.
and he called one of the servants and asked what these things
meant.
and he said unto him thy brother is come and thy father hath
killed the fatted calf because he hath received him safe and
sound.
and he was angry and would not go in therefore came his
father out and intreated him.
and he answering said to his father lo these many years do I
serve thee Neither transgressed I at any time thy
commandment and yet thou never Gavest me a kid that I might
make merry with my friends
but as soon as this thy son was come which hath devoured thy
living with harlots thou hast killed for him the fatted calf.
and he said unto him son thou art ever with me and all that
I have is thine.
it was meet that we should make merry and be glad for this
thy brother was dead and is alive again and was lost and is
found.
and he said also unto his disciples there was a certain rich
man which had a steward and the same was accused unto him
that he had wasted his goods.
and he called him and said unto him how is it that I hear
this of thee? give an account of thy stewardship for thou
mayest be no longer steward.
then the steward said within himself what shall I do? for my
lord taketh away from me the stewardship I cannot dig to beg
I Am ashamed.
I Am resolved what to do that when I Am put out of the
stewardship they may receive me into their houses.
so he called every one of his lord s debtors unto him and
said unto the first how Much owest thou unto my lord?
and he said an hundred measures of oil. and he said unto him
take thy bill and sit down quickly and write fifty.
then said he to another and how Much owest thou? and he said
an hundred measures of wheat. and he said unto him take thy
bill and write fourscore.
and the lord commended the unjust steward because he had done
wisely for the children of this world are in their generation
wiser than the children of light.
and I say unto you make to yourselves friends of the mammon
of unrighteousness that when ye fail they may receive you
into everlasting habitations.
he that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in
Much and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in
Much.
if therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous
mammon who will commit to your trust the true Riches?
and if ye have not been faithful in that which is another
man s who shall give you that which is your own?
no servant can serve two masters for either he will hate the
one and love the other or else he will hold to the one and
despise the other. ye cannot serve God and mammon.
and the Pharisees also who were covetous heard all these
things and they derided him.
and he said unto them ye are they which justify yourselves
before men but God knoweth your hearts for that which is
highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God.
the law and the prophets were until John since that time the
kingdom of God is preached and every man presseth into it.
and it is easier for heaven and earth to pass than one tittle
of the law to fail.
whosoever putteth away his wife and marrieth another
committeth adultery and whosoever marrieth her that is put
away from her husband committeth adultery.
there was a certain rich man which was clothed in purple and
fine linen and fared sumptuously every day
and there was a certain beggar named Lazarus which was laid
at his gate full of sores
and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the
rich man s table moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.
and it came to pass that the beggar died and was carried by
the angels into Abraham s bosom the rich man also died and
was buried
and in hell he lift up his eyes being in torments and seeth
Abraham afar off and Lazarus in his bosom.
and he cried and said father Abraham have mercy on me and
send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water
and cool my tongue for I Am tormented in this flame.
but Abraham said son remember that thou in thy lifetime
receivedst thy good things and likewise Lazarus evil things
but now he is comforted and thou art tormented.
and beside all this between us and you there is a great gulf
fixed so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot
Neither can they pass to us that would come from thence.
then he said I pray thee therefore father that thou
wouldest send him to my father s house
for I have five brethren that he may testify unto them lest
they also come into this place of torment.
Abraham saith unto him they have Moses and the prophets let
them hear them.
and he said nay father Abraham but if one went unto them
from the dead they will repent.
and he said unto him if they hear not Moses and the prophets
Neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.
then said he unto the disciples it is impossible but that
offences will come but woe unto him through whom they come
it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck and he cast into the sea than that he should offend one
of these little ones.
take heed to yourselves if thy brother trespass against thee
rebuke him and if he repent forgive him.
and if he trespass against thee seven times in a day and
seven times in a day turn again to thee saying I repent
thou shalt forgive him.
and the apostles said unto the lord increase our faith.
and the lord said if ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed
ye might say unto this sycamine tree be thou plucked up by
the root and be thou planted in the sea and it should obey
you.
but which of you having a servant plowing or feeding cattle
will say unto him by and by when he is come from the field
go and sit down to meat?
and will not rather say unto him make ready wherewith I may
sup and gird thyself and serve me till I have eaten and
drunken and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?
doth he thank that servant because he did the things that were
commanded him? I trow not.
so likewise ye when ye shall have done all those things which
are commanded you say we are unprofitable servants we have
done that which was our duty to do.
and it came to pass as he went to Jerusalem that he passed
through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.
and as he entered into a certain village there met him Ten
men that were lepers which stood afar off
and they lifted up their voices and said Jesus Master have
mercy on us.
and when he saw them he said unto them go shew yourselves
unto the priests. and it came to pass that as they went
they were cleansed.
and one of them when he saw that he was healed turned back
and with a loud voice glorified God
and fell down on his face at his feet giving him thanks and
he was a Samaritan.
and Jesus answering said were there not Ten cleansed? but
where are the nine?
there are not found that returned to give glory to God save
this stranger.
and he said unto him Arise go thy way thy faith hath made
thee whole.
and when he was demanded of the Pharisees when the kingdom of
God should come he answered them and said the kingdom of God
cometh not with observation
Neither shall they say lo here or lo there for behold
the kingdom of God is within you.
and he said unto the disciples the days will come when ye
shall desire to see one of the days of the son of man and ye
shall not see it.
and they shall say to you see here or see there go not
after them nor follow them.
for as the lightning that lighteneth out of the one part
under heaven shineth unto the other part under heaven so
shall also the son of man be in his day.
but first must he suffer many things and be rejected of this
generation.
and as it was in the days of Noe so shall it be also in the
days of the son of man.
they did eat they drank they married wives they were given
in marriage until the day that Noe entered into the ark and
the flood came and destroyed them all.
likewise also as it was in the days of Lot they did eat they
drank they bought they sold they planted they builded
but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and
brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all.
even thus shall it be in the day when the son of man is
revealed.
in that day he which shall be upon the housetop and his
stuff in the house let him not come down to take it away and
he that is in the field let him likewise not return back.
remember Lot s wife.
whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it and
whosoever shall lose his life shall preserve it.
I tell you in that night there shall be two men in one bed
the one shall be taken and the other shall be left.
two women shall be grinding together the one shall be taken
and the other left.
two men shall be in the field the one shall be taken and the
other left.
and they answered and said unto him where lord? and he said
unto them wheresoever the body is thither will the eagles be
gathered together.
and he spake a parable unto them to this end that men ought
always to pray and not to faint
saying there was in a city a judge which feared not God
Neither regarded man
and there was a widow in that city and she came unto him
saying avenge me of mine adversary.
and he would not for a while but afterward he said within
himself though I fear not God nor regard man
yet because this widow troubleth me I will avenge her lest
by her continual coming she weary me.
and the lord said hear what the unjust judge saith.
and shall not God avenge his own elect which cry day and
night unto him though he bear long with them?
I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. nevertheless
when the son of man cometh shall he find faith on the earth?
and he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in
themselves that they were righteous and despised others
two men went up into the temple to pray the one a Pharisee
and the other a publican.
the Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself God I thank
thee that I Am not as other men are extortioners unjust
adulterers or even as this publican.
I fast twice in the week I give tithes of all that I possess.
and the publican standing afar off would not lift up so Much
as his eyes unto heaven but smote upon his breast saying
God be merciful to me a sinner.
I tell you this man went down to his house justified rather
than the other for every one that exalteth himself shall be
abased and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.
and they brought unto him also infants that he would touch
them but when his disciples saw it they rebuked them.
but Jesus called them unto him and said suffer little
children to come unto me and forbid them not for of such is
the kingdom of God.
verily I say unto you whosoever shall not receive the kingdom
of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein.
and a certain ruler asked him saying good Master what shall
I do to inherit eternal life?
and Jesus said unto him why callest thou me good? none is
good save one that is God.
thou knowest the commandments do not commit adultery do not
kill do not steal do not bear false witness honour thy
father and thy mother.
and he said all these have I kept from my youth up.
now when Jesus heard these things he said unto him yet
lackest thou one thing sell all that thou hast and
distribute unto the poor and thou shalt have treasure in
heaven and come follow me.
and when he heard this he was very sorrowful for he was very
rich.
and when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful he said how
hardly shall they that have Riches enter into the kingdom of
God
for it is easier for a camel to go through a needle s eye
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
and they that heard it said who then can be saved?
and he said the things which are impossible with men are
possible with God.
then Peter said lo we have left all and followed thee.
and he said unto them verily I say unto you there is no man
that hath left house or parents or brethren or wife or
children for the kingdom of God s sake
who shall not receive manifold more in this present time and
in the world to come life everlasting.
then he took unto him the twelve and said unto them behold
we go up to Jerusalem and all things that are written by the
prophets concerning the son of man shall be accomplished.
for he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles and shall be
mocked and spitefully entreated and spitted on
and they shall scourge him and put him to death and the
third day he shall rise again.
and they understood none of these things and this saying was
hid from them Neither knew they the things which were spoken.
and it came to pass that as he was come nigh unto Jericho a
certain blind man sat by the way side begging
and hearing the multitude pass by he asked what it meant.
and they told him that Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.
and he cried saying Jesus thou son of David have mercy on
me.
and they which went before rebuked him that he should hold
his peace but he cried so Much the more thou son of David
have mercy on me.
and Jesus stood and commanded him to be brought unto him and
when he was come near he asked him
saying what wilt thou that I shall do unto thee? and he said
lord that I may receive my sight.
and Jesus said unto him receive thy sight thy faith hath
saved thee.
and Immediately he received his sight and followed him
glorifying God and all the people when they saw it gave
praise unto God.
and Jesus entered and passed through Jericho.
and behold there was a man named Zacchaeus which was the
chief among the publicans and he was rich.
and he sought to see Jesus who he was and could not for the
press because he was little of stature.
and he ran before and climbed up into a sycomore tree to see
him for he was to pass that way.
and when Jesus came to the place he looked up and saw him
and said unto him Zacchaeus make haste and come down for
to day I must abide at thy house.
and he made haste and came down and received him joyfully.
and when they saw it they all murmured saying that he was
gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner.
and Zacchaeus stood and said unto the lord behold lord the
half of my goods I give to the poor and if I have taken any
thing from any man by false accusation I restore him
fourfold.
and Jesus said unto him this day is salvation come to this
house forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham.
for the son of man is come to seek and to save that which was
lost.
and as they heard these things he added and spake a parable
because he was nigh to Jerusalem and because they thought
that the kingdom of God should Immediately appear.
he said therefore a certain nobleman went into a far country
to receive for himself a kingdom and to return.
and he called his Ten servants and delivered them Ten pounds
and said unto them occupy till I come.
but his citizens hated him and sent a message after him
saying we will not have this man to reign over us.
and it came to pass that when he was returned having
received the kingdom then he commanded these servants to be
called unto him to whom he had given the money that he might
know how Much every man had gained by trading.
then came the first saying lord thy pound hath gained Ten
pounds.
and he said unto him well thou good servant because thou
hast been faithful in a very little have thou authority over
Ten cities.
and the second came saying lord thy pound hath gained five
pounds.
and he said likewise to him be thou also over five cities.
and another came saying lord behold here is thy pound
which I have kept laid up in a napkin
for I feared thee because thou art an austere man thou
takest up that thou layedst not down and reapest that thou
didst not sow.
and he saith unto him out of thine own mouth will I judge
thee thou wicked servant. thou knewest that I was an austere
man taking up that I laid not down and reaping that I did
not sow
wherefore then Gavest not thou my money into the bank that at
my coming I might have required mine own with usury?
and he said unto them that stood by take from him the pound
and give it to him that hath Ten pounds.
 and they said unto him lord he hath Ten pounds.
for I say unto you that unto every one which hath shall be
given and from him that hath not even that he hath shall be
taken away from him.
but those mine enemies which would not that I should reign
over them bring hither and slay them before me.
and when he had thus spoken he went before ascending up to
Jerusalem.
and it came to pass when he was come nigh to Bethphage and
Bethany at the mount called the mount of olives he sent two
of his disciples
saying go ye into the village over against you in the which
at your entering ye shall find a colt tied whereon yet never
man sat loose him and bring him hither.
and if any man ask you why do ye loose him? thus shall ye say
unto him because the lord hath need of him.
and they that were sent went their way and found even as he
had said unto them.
and as they were loosing the colt the owners thereof said
unto them why loose ye the colt?
and they said the lord hath need of him.
and they brought him to Jesus and they cast their garments
upon the colt and they set Jesus thereon.
and as he went they spread their clothes in the way.
and when he was come nigh even now at the descent of the
mount of olives the whole multitude of the disciples began to
rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the Mighty
works that they had seen
saying blessed be the king that cometh in the name of the
lord peace in heaven and glory in the highest.
and some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said unto
him Master rebuke thy disciples.
and he answered and said unto them I tell you that if these
should hold their peace the stones would Immediately cry out.
and when he was come near he beheld the city and wept over
it
saying if thou hadst known even thou at least in this thy
day the things which belong unto thy peace but now they are
hid from thine eyes.
for the days shall come upon thee that thine enemies shall
cast a trench about thee and compass thee round and keep
thee in on every side
and shall lay thee even with the ground and thy children
within thee and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon
another because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.
and he went into the temple and began to cast out them that
sold therein and them that bought
saying unto them it is written my house is the house of
prayer but ye have made it a den of thieves.
and he taught daily in the temple. but the chief priests and
the scribes and the chief of the people sought to destroy him
and could not find what they might do for all the people were
very attentive to hear him.
and it came to pass that on one of those days as he taught
the people in the temple and preached the gospel the chief
priests and the scribes came upon him with the elders
and spake unto him saying tell us by what authority doest
thou these things? or who is he that gave thee this authority?
and he answered and said unto them I will also ask you one
thing and answer me
the baptism of John was it from heaven or of men?
and they reasoned with themselves saying if we shall say
from heaven he will say why then believed ye him not?
but and if we say of men all the people will stone us for
they be persuaded that John was a prophet.
and they answered that they could not tell whence it was.
and Jesus said unto them Neither tell I you by what authority
I do these things.
then began he to speak to the people this parable a certain
man planted a vineyard and let it forth to husbandmen and
went into a far country for a long time.
and at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen that
they should give him of the fruit of the vineyard but the
husbandmen beat him and sent him away empty.
and again he sent another servant and they beat him also and
entreated him shamefully and sent him away empty.
and again he sent a third and they wounded him also and cast
him out.
then said the lord of the vineyard what shall I do? I will
send my beloved son it may be they will reverence him when
they see him.
but when the husbandmen saw him they reasoned among
themselves saying this is the heir come let us kill him
that the inheritance may be ours.
so they cast him out of the vineyard and killed him. what
therefore shall the lord of the vineyard do unto them?
he shall come and destroy these husbandmen and shall give the
vineyard to others. and when they heard it they said God
forbid.
and he beheld them and said what is this then that is
written the stone which the builders rejected the same is
become the head of the corner?
whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be broken but on
whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to powder.
and the chief priests and the scribes the same hour sought to
lay hands on him and they feared the people for they
perceived that he had spoken this parable against them.
and they watched him and sent forth spies which should feign
themselves just men that they might take hold of his words
that so they might deliver him unto the power and authority of
the Governor.
and they asked him saying Master we know that thou sayest
and teachest rightly Neither acceptest thou the person of
any but teachest the way of God truly
is it lawful for us to give tribute unto Caesar or no?
but he perceived their craftiness and said unto them why
tempt ye me?
shew me a penny. whose image and superscription hath it? they
answered and said Caesar s.
and he said unto them render therefore unto Caesar the things
which be Caesar s and unto God the things which be God s.
and they could not take hold of his words before the people
and they marvelled at his answer and held their peace.
then came to him certain of the Sadducees which deny that
there is any resurrection and they asked him
saying Master Moses wrote unto us if any man s brother die
having a wife and he die without children that his brother
should take his wife and raise up seed unto his brother.
there were therefore seven brethren and the first took a
wife and died without children.
and the second took her to wife and he died childless.
and the third took her and in like manner the seven also and
they left no children and died.
last of all the woman died also.
therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them is she? for
seven had her to wife.
and Jesus answering said unto them the children of this world
marry and are given in marriage
but they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world
and the resurrection from the dead Neither marry nor are
given in marriage
Neither can they die any more for they are equal unto the
angels and are the children of God being the children of the
resurrection.
now that the dead are raised even Moses shewed at the bush
when he calleth the lord the God of Abraham and the God of
Isaac and the God of Jacob.
for he is not a God of the dead but of the living for all
live unto him.
then certain of the scribes answering said Master thou hast
well said.
and after that they durst not ask him any question at all.
and he said unto them how say they that Christ is David s
son?
and David himself saith in the book of psalms the lord said
unto my lord sit thou on my right hand
till I make thine enemies thy footstool.
David therefore calleth him lord how is he then his son?
then in the audience of all the people he said unto his
disciples
beware of the scribes which desire to walk in long robes and
love greetings in the markets and the highest seats in the
synagogues and the chief rooms at feasts
which devour widows houses and for a shew make long prayers
the same shall receive greater damnation.
and he looked up and saw the rich men casting their gifts
into the treasury.
and he saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither two
mites.
and he said of a truth I say unto you that this poor widow
hath cast in more than they all
for all these have of their abundance cast in unto the
offerings of God but she of her penury hath cast in all the
living that she had.
and as some spake of the temple how it was adorned with
goodly stones and gifts he said
as for these things which ye behold the days will come in
the which there shall not be left one stone upon another that
shall not be thrown down.
and they asked him saying Master but when shall these
things be? and what sign will there be when these things shall
come to pass?
and he said take heed that ye be not deceived for many shall
come in my name saying I Am Christ and the time draweth
near go ye not therefore after them.
but when ye shall hear of wars and commotions be not
terrified for these things must first come to pass but the
end is not by and by.
then said he unto them nation shall rise against nation and
kingdom against kingdom
and great earthquakes shall be in divers places and famines
and pestilences and fearful sights and great signs shall
there be from heaven.
but before all these they shall lay their hands on you and
persecute you delivering you up to the synagogues and into
prisons being brought before kings and rulers for my name s
sake.
and it shall turn to you for a testimony.
settle it therefore in your hearts not to meditate before
what ye shall answer
for I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your
adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist.
and ye shall be betrayed both by parents and brethren and
kinsfolks and friends and some of you shall they cause to be
put to death.
and ye shall be hated of all men for my name s sake.
but there shall not an hair of your head perish.
in your patience possess ye your souls.
and when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies then
know that the desolation thereof is nigh.
then let them which are in Judaea flee to the mountains and
let them which are in the midst of it depart out and let not
them that are in the countries enter thereinto.
for these be the days of vengeance that all things which are
written may be fulfilled.
but woe unto them that are with child and to them that give
suck in those days for there shall be great distress in the
land and wrath upon this people.
and they shall fall by the edge of the sword and shall be led
away captive into all nations and Jerusalem shall be trodden
down of the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled.
and there shall be signs in the sun and in the moon and in
the stars and upon the earth distress of nations with
perplexity the sea and the waves roaring
men s hearts failing them for fear and for looking after
those things which are coming on the earth for the powers of
heaven shall be shaken.
and then shall they see the son of man coming in a cloud with
power and great glory.
and when these things begin to come to pass then look up and
lift up your heads for your redemption draweth nigh.
and he spake to them a parable behold the fig tree and all
the trees
when they now shoot forth ye see and know of your own selves
that summer is now nigh at hand.
so likewise ye when ye see these things come to pass know ye
that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand.
verily I say unto you this generation shall not pass away
till all be fulfilled.
heaven and earth shall pass away but my words shall not pass
away.
and take heed to yourselves lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness and cares of
this life and so that day come upon you unawares.
for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the
face of the whole earth.
watch ye therefore and pray always that ye may be accounted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass and
to stand before the son of man.
and in the day time he was teaching in the temple and at
night he went out and abode in the mount that is called the
mount of olives.
and all the people came early in the morning to him in the
temple for to hear him.
now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh which is called
the passover.
and the chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill
him for they feared the people.
then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot being of the
number of the twelve.
and he went his way and communed with the chief priests and
captains how he might betray him unto them.
and they were glad and covenanted to give him money.
and he promised and sought opportunity to betray him unto
them in the absence of the multitude.
then came the day of unleavened bread when the passover must
be killed.
and he sent Peter and John saying go and prepare us the
passover that we may eat.
and they said unto him where wilt thou that we prepare?
and he said unto them behold when ye are entered into the
city there shall a man meet you bearing a pitcher of water
follow him into the house where he entereth in.
and ye shall say unto the goodman of the house the Master
saith unto thee where is the guestchamber where I shall eat
the passover with my disciples?
and he shall shew you a large upper room furnished there make
ready.
and they went and found as he had said unto them and they
made ready the passover.
and when the hour was come he sat down and the twelve
apostles with him.
and he said unto them with desire I have desired to eat this
passover with you before I suffer
for I say unto you I will not any more eat thereof until it
be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.
and he took the cup and gave thanks and said take this and
divide it among yourselves
for I say unto you I will not drink of the fruit of the vine
until the kingdom of God shall come.
and he took bread and gave thanks and brake it and gave
unto them saying this is my body which is given for you
this do in remembrance of me.
likewise also the cup after supper saying this cup is the
new testament in my blood which is shed for you.
but behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on
the table.
and truly the son of man goeth as it was determined but woe
unto that man by whom he is betrayed
and they began to enquire among themselves which of them it
was that should do this thing.
and there was also a strife among them which of them should
be accounted the greatest.
and he said unto them the kings of the Gentiles exercise
lordship over them and they that exercise authority upon them
are called benefactors.
but ye shall not be so but he that is greatest among you let
him be as the younger and he that is chief as he that doth
serve.
for whether is greater he that sitteth at meat or he that
serveth? is not he that sitteth at meat? but I Am among you as
he that serveth.
ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations.
and I appoint unto you a kingdom as my father hath appointed
unto me
that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit
on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
and the lord said Simon Simon behold Satan hath desired to
have you that he may sift you as wheat
but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not and when
thou art converted strengthen thy brethren.
and he said unto him lord I Am ready to go with thee both
into prison and to death.
and he said I tell thee Peter the cock shall not crow this
day before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me.
and he said unto them when I sent you without purse and
scrip and shoes lacked ye any thing? and they said nothing.
then said he unto them but now he that hath a purse let him
take it and likewise his scrip and he that hath no sword
let him sell his garment and buy one.
for I say unto you that this that is written must yet be
accomplished in me and he was reckoned among the
transgressors for the things concerning me have an end.
and they said lord behold here are two swords. and he said
unto them it is enough.
and he came out and went as he was wont to the mount of
olives and his disciples also followed him.
and when he was at the place he said unto them pray that ye
enter not into temptation.
and he was withdrawn from them about a stone s cast and
kneeled down and prayed
saying father if thou be willing remove this cup from me
nevertheless not my will but thine be done.
and there appeared an angel unto him from heaven
strengthening him.
and being in an agony he prayed more earnestly and his sweat
was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the
ground.
and when he rose up from prayer and was come to his
disciples he found them sleeping for sorrow
and said unto them why sleep ye? rise and pray lest ye enter
into temptation.
and while he yet spake behold a multitude and he that was
called Judas one of the twelve went before them and drew
near unto Jesus to Kiss him.
but Jesus said unto him Judas betrayest thou the son of man
with a Kiss?
when they which were about him saw what would follow they
said unto him lord shall we smite with the sword?
and one of them smote the servant of the high priest and cut
off his right ear.
and Jesus answered and said suffer ye thus far. and he
touched his ear and healed him.
then Jesus said unto the chief priests and captains of the
temple and the elders which were come to him be ye come
out as against a thief with swords and staves?
when I was daily with you in the temple ye stretched forth no
hands against me but this is your hour and the power of
darkness.
then took they him and led him and brought him into the high
priest s house. and Peter followed afar off.
and when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall and
were set down together Peter sat down among them.
but a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire and
earnestly looked upon him and said this man was also with
him.
and he denied him saying woman I know him not.
and after a little while another saw him and said thou art
also of them. and Peter said man I Am not.
and about the space of one hour after another confidently
affirmed saying of a truth this fellow also was with him
for he is a Galilaean.
and Peter said man I know not what thou sayest. and
Immediately while he yet spake the cock crew.
and the lord turned and looked upon Peter. and Peter
remembered the word of the lord how he had said unto him
before the cock crow thou shalt deny me thrice.
and Peter went out and wept bitterly.
and the men that held Jesus mocked him and smote him.
and when they had blindfolded him they struck him on the
face and asked him saying prophesy who is it that smote
thee?
and many other things blasphemously spake they against him.
and as soon as it was day the elders of the people and the
chief priests and the scribes came together and led him into
their council saying
art thou the Christ? tell us. and he said unto them if I tell
you ye will not believe
and if I also ask you ye will not answer me nor let me go.
hereafter shall the son of man sit on the right hand of the
power of God.
then said they all art thou then the son of God? and he said
unto them ye say that I Am.
and they said what need we any further witness? for we
ourselves have heard of his own mouth.
and the whole multitude of them arose and led him unto
Pilate.
and they began to accuse him saying we found this fellow
perverting the nation and forbidding to give tribute to
Caesar saying that he himself is Christ a king.
and Pilate asked him saying art thou the king of the Jews?
and he answered him and said thou sayest it.
then said Pilate to the chief priests and to the people I
find no fault in this man.
and they were the more fierce saying he stirreth up the
people teaching throughout all Jewry beginning from Galilee
to this place.
when Pilate heard of Galilee he asked whether the man were a
Galilaean.
and as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod s
jurisdiction he sent him to Herod who himself also was at
Jerusalem at that time.
and when Herod saw Jesus he was exceeding glad for he was
desirous to see him of a long season because he had heard
many things of him and he hoped to have seen some miracle
done by him.
then he questioned with him in many words but he answered him
nothing.
and the chief priests and scribes stood and vehemently accused
him.
and Herod with his men of war set him at nought and mocked
him and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe and sent him again to
Pilate.
and the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together
for before they were at enmity between themselves.
and Pilate when he had called together the chief priests and
the rulers and the people
said unto them ye have brought this man unto me as one that
perverteth the people and behold I having examined him
before you have found no fault in this man touching those
things whereof ye accuse him
no nor yet Herod for I sent you to him and lo nothing
worthy of death is done unto him.
I will therefore chastise him and release him.
 for of necessity he must release one unto them at the feast.
and they cried out all at once saying away with this man
and release unto us Barabbas
 who for a certain sedition made in the city and for murder
was cast into prison.
Pilate therefore willing to release Jesus spake again to
them.
but they cried saying crucify him crucify him.
and he said unto them the third time why what evil hath he
done? I have found no cause of death in him I will therefore
chastise him and let him go.
and they were instant with loud voices requiring that he
might be crucified. and the voices of them and of the chief
priests prevailed.
and Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.
and he released unto them him that for sedition and murder was
cast into prison whom they had desired but he delivered
Jesus to their will.
and as they led him away they laid hold upon one Simon a
Cyrenian coming out of the country and on him they laid the
cross that he might bear it after Jesus.
and there followed him a great company of people and of
women which also bewailed and lamented him.
but Jesus turning unto them said daughters of Jerusalem weep
not for me but weep for yourselves and for your children.
for behold the days are coming in the which they shall say
blessed are the barren and the wombs that never bare and the
paps which never gave suck.
then shall they begin to say to the mountains fall on us and
to the hills cover us.
for if they do these things in a green tree what shall be
done in the dry?
and there were also two other malefactors led with him to be
put to death.
and when they were come to the place which is called Calvary
there they crucified him and the malefactors one on the
right hand and the other on the left.
then said Jesus father forgive them for they know not what
they do. and they parted his raiment and cast lots.
and the people stood beholding. and the rulers also with them
derided him saying he saved others let him save himself if
he be Christ the chosen of God.
and the soldiers also mocked him coming to him and offering
him vinegar
and saying if thou be the king of the Jews save thyself.
and a superscription also was written over him in letters of
Greek and Latin and Hebrew this is the king of the Jews.
and one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him
saying if thou be Christ save thyself and us.
but the other answering rebuked him saying dost not thou
fear God seeing thou art in the same condemnation?
and we indeed justly for we receive the due reward of our
deeds but this man hath done nothing amiss.
and he said unto Jesus lord remember me when thou comest
into thy kingdom.
and Jesus said unto him verily I say unto thee to day shalt
thou be with me in paradise.
and it was about the sixth hour and there was a darkness over
all the earth until the ninth hour.
and the sun was darkened and the veil of the temple was rent
in the midst.
and when Jesus had cried with a loud voice he said father
into thy hands I commend my spirit and having said thus he
gave up the ghost.
now when the centurion saw what was done he glorified God
saying certainly this was a righteous man.
and all the people that came together to that sight beholding
the things which were done smote their breasts and returned.
and all his acquaintance and the women that followed him from
Galilee stood afar off beholding these things.
and behold there was a man named Joseph a counsellor and
he was a good man and a just
 the same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them
he was of Arimathaea a city of the Jews who also himself
waited for the kingdom of God.
this man went unto Pilate and begged the body of Jesus.
and he took it down and wrapped it in linen and laid it in a
sepulchre that was hewn in stone wherein never man before was
laid.
and that day was the preparation and the sabbath drew on.
and the women also which came with him from Galilee followed
after and beheld the sepulchre and how his body was laid.
and they returned and prepared spices and ointments and
rested the sabbath day according to the commandment.
now upon the first day of the week very early in the morning
they came unto the sepulchre bringing the spices which they
had prepared and certain others with them.
and they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre.
and they entered in and found not the body of the lord Jesus.
and it came to pass as they were Much perplexed thereabout
behold two men stood by them in shining garments
and as they were afraid and bowed down their faces to the
earth they said unto them why seek ye the living among the
dead?
he is not here but is risen remember how he spake unto you
when he was yet in Galilee
saying the son of man must be delivered into the hands of
sinful men and be crucified and the third day rise again.
and they remembered his words
and returned from the sepulchre and told all these things
unto the eleven and to all the rest.
it was Mary Magdalene and Joanna and Mary the mother of
James and other women that were with them which told these
things unto the apostles.
and their words seemed to them as idle tales and they
believed them not.
then arose Peter and ran unto the sepulchre and stooping
down he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves and
departed wondering in himself at that which was come to pass.
and behold two of them went that same day to a village
called Emmaus which was from Jerusalem about threescore
furlongs.
and they talked together of all these things which had
happened.
and it came to pass that while they communed together and
reasoned Jesus himself drew near and went with them.
but their eyes were holden that they should not know him.
and he said unto them what manner of communications are these
that ye have one to another as ye walk and are sad?
and the one of them whose name was Cleopas answering said
unto him art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem and hast not
known the things which are come to pass there in these days?
and he said unto them what things? and they said unto him
concerning Jesus of Nazareth which was a prophet Mighty in
deed and word before God and all the people
and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be
condemned to death and have crucified him.
but we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed
Israel and beside all this to day is the third day since
these things were done.
yea and certain women also of our company made us astonished
which were early at the sepulchre
and when they found not his body they came saying that they
had also seen a vision of angels which said that he was
alive.
and certain of them which were with us went to the sepulchre
and found it even so as the women had said but him they saw
not.
then he said unto them O fools and slow of heart to believe
all that the prophets have spoken
ought not Christ to have suffered these things and to enter
into his glory?
and beginning at Moses and all the prophets he expounded unto
them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.
and they drew nigh unto the village whither they went and he
made as though he would have gone further.
but they constrained him saying abide with us for it is
toward evening and the day is far spent. and he went in to
tarry with them.
and it came to pass as he sat at meat with them he took
bread and blessed it and brake and gave to them.
and their eyes were opened and they knew him and he vanished
out of their sight.
and they said one to another did not our heart burn within
us while he talked with us by the way and while he opened to
us the scriptures?
and they rose up the same hour and returned to Jerusalem and
found the eleven gathered together and them that were with
them
saying the lord is risen indeed and hath appeared to Simon.
and they told what things were done in the way and how he was
known of them in breaking of bread.
and as they thus spake Jesus himself stood in the midst of
them and saith unto them peace be unto you.
but they were terrified and affrighted and supposed that they
had seen a spirit.
and he said unto them why are ye troubled? and why do
thoughts Arise in your hearts?
behold my hands and my feet that it is I myself handle me
and see for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me
have.
and when he had thus spoken he shewed them his hands and his
feet.
and while they yet believed not for joy and wondered he said
unto them have ye here any meat?
and they gave him a piece of a broiled fish and of an
honeycomb.
and he took it and did eat before them.
and he said unto them these are the words which I spake unto
you while I was yet with you that all things must be
fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses and in the
prophets and in the psalms concerning me.
then opened he their understanding that they might understand
the scriptures
and said unto them thus it is written and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the third day
and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached
in his name among all nations beginning at Jerusalem.
and ye are witnesses of these things.
and behold I send the promise of my father upon you but
tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem until ye be endued with
power from on high.
and he led them out as far as to Bethany and he lifted up his
hands and blessed them.
and it came to pass while he blessed them he was parted from
them and carried up into heaven.
and they worshipped him and returned to Jerusalem with great
joy
and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God.
Amen.
in the beginning was the word and the word was with God and
the word was God.
the same was in the beginning with God.
all things were made by him and without him was not any thing
made that was made.
in him was life and the life was the light of men.
and the light shineth in darkness and the darkness
comprehended it not.
there was a man sent from God whose name was John.
the same came for a witness to bear witness of the light
that all men through him might believe.
he was not that light but was sent to bear witness of that
light.
that was the true light which lighteth every man that cometh
into the world.
he was in the world and the world was made by him and the
world knew him not.
he came unto his own and his own received him not.
but as many as received him to them gave he power to become
the sons of God even to them that believe on his name
which were born not of blood nor of the will of the flesh
nor of the will of man but of God.
and the word was made flesh and dwelt among us and we
beheld his glory the glory as of the only begotten of the
father full of grace and truth.
John bare witness of him and cried saying this was he of
whom I spake he that cometh after me is preferred before me
for he was before me.
and of his fulness have all we received and grace for grace.
for the law was given by Moses but grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ.
no man hath seen God at any time the only begotten son which
is in the bosom of the father he hath declared him.
and this is the record of John when the Jews sent priests and
Levites from Jerusalem to ask him who art thou?
and he confessed and denied not but confessed I Am not the
Christ.
and they asked him what then? art thou Elias? and he saith I
Am not. art thou that prophet? and he answered no.
then said they unto him who art thou? that we may give an
answer to them that sent us. what sayest thou of thyself?
he said I Am the voice of one crying in the wilderness make
straight the way of the lord as said the prophet Esaias.
and they which were sent were of the Pharisees.
and they asked him and said unto him why baptizest thou
then if thou be not that Christ nor Elias Neither that
prophet?
John answered them saying I baptize with water but there
standeth one among you whom ye know not
he it is who coming after me is preferred before me whose
shoe s latchet I Am not worthy to unloose.
these things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan where John
was baptizing.
the next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him and saith
behold the lamb of God which taketh away the Sin of the
world.
this is he of whom I said after me cometh a man which is
preferred before me for he was before me.
and I knew him not but that he should be made manifest to
Israel therefore Am I come baptizing with water.
and John bare record saying I saw the spirit descending from
heaven like a dove and it abode upon him.
and I knew him not but he that sent me to baptize with water
the same said unto me upon whom thou shalt see the spirit
descending and remaining on him the same is he which
baptizeth with the holy ghost.
and I saw and bare record that this is the son of God.
again the next day after John stood and two of his disciples
and looking upon Jesus as he walked he saith behold the lamb
of God
and the two disciples heard him speak and they followed
Jesus.
then Jesus turned and saw them following and saith unto
them what seek ye? they said unto him Rabbi which is to
say being interpreted Master where dwellest thou?
he saith unto them come and see. they came and saw where he
dwelt and abode with him that day for it was about the tenth
hour.
one of the two which heard John speak and followed him was
Andrew Simon Peter s brother.
he first findeth his own brother Simon and saith unto him we
have found the Messias which is being interpreted the
Christ.
and he brought him to Jesus. and when Jesus beheld him he
said thou art Simon the son of Jona thou shalt be called
Cephas which is by interpretation a stone.
the day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee and
findeth Philip and saith unto him follow me.
now Philip was of Bethsaida the city of Andrew and Peter.
Philip findeth Nathanael and saith unto him we have found
him of whom Moses in the law and the prophets did write
Jesus of Nazareth the son of Joseph.
and Nathanael said unto him can there any good thing come out
of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him come and see.
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him and saith of him behold an
Israelite indeed in whom is no guile
Nathanael saith unto him whence knowest thou me? Jesus
answered and said unto him before that Philip called thee
when thou wast under the fig tree I saw thee.
Nathanael answered and saith unto him Rabbi thou art the son
of God thou art the king of Israel.
Jesus answered and said unto him because I said unto thee I
saw thee under the fig tree believest thou? thou shalt see
greater things than these.
and he saith unto him verily verily I say unto you
hereafter ye shall see heaven open and the angels of God
ascending and descending upon the son of man.
and the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee and
the mother of Jesus was there
and both Jesus was called and his disciples to the marriage.
and when they wanted wine the mother of Jesus saith unto him
they have no wine.
Jesus saith unto her woman what have I to do with thee? mine
hour is not yet come.
his mother saith unto the servants whatsoever he saith unto
you do it.
and there were set there six waterpots of stone after the
manner of the purifying of the Jews containing two or three
firkins apiece.
Jesus saith unto them fill the waterpots with water. and they
filled them up to the brim.
and he saith unto them draw out now and bear unto the
Governor of the feast. and they bare it.
when the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made
wine and knew not whence it was but the servants which drew
the water knew the Governor of the feast called the
bridegroom
and saith unto him every man at the beginning doth set forth
good wine and when men have well drunk then that which is
worse but thou hast kept the good wine until now.
this beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee and
manifested forth his glory and his disciples believed on him.
after this he went down to Capernaum he and his mother and
his brethren and his disciples and they continued there not
many days.
and the Jews passover was at hand and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.
and found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep and
doves and the changers of money sitting
and when he had made a scourge of small cords he drove them
all out of the temple and the sheep and the oxen and poured
out the changers money and overthrew the tables
and said unto them that sold doves take these things hence
make not my father s house an house of merchandise.
and his disciples remembered that it was written the zeal of
thine house hath eaten me up.
then answered the Jews and said unto him what sign shewest
thou unto us seeing that thou doest these things?
Jesus answered and said unto them destroy this temple and in
three days I will raise it up.
then said the Jews forty and six years was this temple in
building and wilt thou rear it up in three days?
but he spake of the temple of his body.
when therefore he was risen from the dead his disciples
remembered that he had said this unto them and they believed
the scripture and the word which Jesus had said.
now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover in the feast
day many believed in his name when they saw the miracles
which he did.
but Jesus did not commit himself unto them because he knew
all men
and needed not that any should testify of man for he knew
what was in man.
there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus a ruler of
the Jews
the same came to Jesus by night and said unto him Rabbi we
know that thou art a teacher come from God for no man can do
these miracles that thou doest except God be with him.
Jesus answered and said unto him verily verily I say unto
thee except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of
God.
Nicodemus saith unto him how can a man be born when he is
old? can he enter the second time into his mother s womb and
be born?
Jesus answered verily verily I say unto thee except a man
be born of water and of the spirit he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God.
that which is born of the flesh is flesh and that which is
born of the spirit is spirit.
marvel not that I said unto thee ye must be born again.
the wind bloweth where it listeth and thou hearest the sound
thereof but canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it
goeth so is every one that is born of the spirit.
Nicodemus answered and said unto him how can these things be?
Jesus answered and said unto him art thou a Master of Israel
and knowest not these things?
verily verily I say unto thee we speak that we do know and
testify that we have seen and ye receive not our witness.
if I have told you earthly things and ye believe not how
shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things?
and no man hath ascended up to heaven but he that came down
from heaven even the son of man which is in heaven.
and as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness even so
must the son of man be lifted up
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have
eternal life.
for God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten
son that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but
have everlasting life.
for God sent not his son into the world to condemn the world
but that the world through him might be saved.
he that believeth on him is not condemned but he that
believeth not is condemned already because he hath not
believed in the name of the only begotten son of God.
and this is the condemnation that light is come into the
world and men loved darkness rather than light because their
deeds were evil.
for every one that doeth evil hateth the light Neither cometh
to the light lest his deeds should be reproved.
but he that doeth truth cometh to the light that his deeds
may be made manifest that they are wrought in God.
after these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land
of Judaea and there he tarried with them and baptized.
and John also was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim because
there was Much water there and they came and were baptized.
for John was not yet cast into prison.
then there arose a question between some of John s disciples
and the Jews about purifying.
and they came unto John and said unto him Rabbi he that was
with thee beyond Jordan to whom thou barest witness behold
the same baptizeth and all men come to him.
John answered and said a man can receive nothing except it
be given him from heaven.
ye yourselves bear me witness that I said I Am not the
Christ but that I Am sent before him.
he that hath the bride is the bridegroom but the friend of
the bridegroom which standeth and heareth him rejoiceth
greatly because of the bridegroom s voice this my joy
therefore is fulfilled.
he must increase but I must decrease.
he that cometh from above is above all he that is of the
earth is earthly and speaketh of the earth he that cometh
from heaven is above all.
and what he hath seen and heard that he testifieth and no
man receiveth his testimony.
he that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that
God is true.
for he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God for God
giveth not the spirit by measure unto him.
the father loveth the son and hath given all things into his
hand.
he that believeth on the son hath everlasting life and he
that believeth not the son shall not see life but the wrath
of God abideth on him.
when therefore the lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that
Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John
 though Jesus himself baptized not but his disciples
he left Judaea and departed again into Galilee.
and he must needs go through Samaria.
then cometh he to a city of Samaria which is called Sychar
near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son
Joseph.
now Jacob s well was there. Jesus therefore being wearied
with his journey sat thus on the well and it was about the
sixth hour.
there cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water Jesus saith
unto her give me to drink.
 for his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.
then saith the woman of Samaria unto him how is it that thou
being a Jew askest drink of me which Am a woman of Samaria?
for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans.
Jesus answered and said unto her if thou knewest the gift of
God and who it is that saith to thee give me to drink thou
wouldest have asked of him and he would have given thee
living water.
the woman saith unto him Sir thou hast nothing to draw with
and the well is deep from whence then hast thou that living
water?
art thou greater than our father Jacob which gave us the
well and drank thereof himself and his children and his
cattle?
Jesus answered and said unto her whosoever drinketh of this
water shall thirst again
but whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him
shall never thirst but the water that I shall give him shall
be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.
the woman saith unto him Sir give me this water that I
thirst not Neither come hither to draw.
Jesus saith unto her go call thy husband and come hither.
the woman answered and said I have no husband. Jesus said
unto her thou hast well said I have no husband
for thou hast had five husbands and he whom thou now hast is
not thy husband in that saidst thou truly.
the woman saith unto him Sir I perceive that thou art a
prophet.
our fathers worshipped in this mountain and ye say that in
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.
Jesus saith unto her woman believe me the hour cometh when
ye shall Neither in this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem
worship the father.
ye worship ye know not what we know what we worship for
salvation is of the Jews.
but the hour cometh and now is when the true worshippers
shall worship the father in spirit and in truth for the
father seeketh such to worship him.
God is a spirit and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth.
the woman saith unto him I know that Messias cometh which is
called Christ when he is come he will tell us all things.
Jesus saith unto her I that speak unto thee Am he.
and upon this came his disciples and marvelled that he talked
with the woman yet no man said what seekest thou? or why
talkest thou with her?
the woman then left her waterpot and went her way into the
city and saith to the men
come see a man which told me all things that ever I did is
not this the Christ?
then they went out of the city and came unto him.
in the mean while his disciples prayed him saying Master
eat.
but he said unto them I have meat to eat that ye know not of.
therefore said the disciples one to another hath any man
brought him ought to eat?
Jesus saith unto them my meat is to do the will of him that
sent me and to finish his work.
say not ye there are yet four months and then cometh
harvest? behold I say unto you lift up your eyes and look
on the fields for they are white already to harvest.
and he that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto
life eternal that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may
rejoice together.
and herein is that saying true one soweth and another
reapeth.
I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labour other
men laboured and ye are entered into their labours.
and many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for
the saying of the woman which testified he told me all that
ever I did.
so when the Samaritans were come unto him they besought him
that he would tarry with them and he abode there two days.
and many more believed because of his own word
and said unto the woman now we believe not because of thy
saying for we have heard him ourselves and know that this is
indeed the Christ the saviour of the world.
now after two days he departed thence and went into Galilee.
for Jesus himself testified that a prophet hath no honour in
his own country.
then when he was come into Galilee the Galilaeans received
him having seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem at
the feast for they also went unto the feast.
so Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee where he made the
water wine. and there was a certain nobleman whose son was
sick at Capernaum.
when he heard that Jesus was come out of Judaea into Galilee
he went unto him and besought him that he would come down
and heal his son for he was at the point of death.
then said Jesus unto him except ye see signs and wonders ye
will not believe.
the nobleman saith unto him Sir come down ere my child die.
Jesus saith unto him go thy way thy son liveth. and the man
believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him and he went
his way.
and as he was now going down his servants met him and told
him saying thy son liveth.
then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. and
they said unto him yesterday at the seventh hour the fever
left him.
so the father knew that it was at the same hour in the which
Jesus said unto him thy son liveth and himself believed and
his whole house.
this is again the second miracle that Jesus did when he was
come out of Judaea into Galilee.
after this there was a feast of the Jews and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.
now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep market a pool which is
called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda having five porches.
in these lay a great multitude of impotent folk of blind
halt withered waiting for the moving of the water.
for an angel went down at a certain season into the pool and
troubled the water whosoever then first after the troubling
of the water stepped in was made whole of whatsoever disease
he had.
and a certain man was there which had an infirmity thirty and
eight years.
when Jesus saw him lie and knew that he had been now a long
time in that case he saith unto him wilt thou be made whole?
the impotent man answered him Sir I have no man when the
water is troubled to put me into the pool but while I Am
coming another steppeth down before me.
Jesus saith unto him rise take up thy bed and walk.
and Immediately the man was made whole and took up his bed
and walked and on the same day was the sabbath.
the Jews therefore said unto him that was cured it is the
sabbath day it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed.
he answered them he that made me whole the same said unto
me take up thy bed and walk.
then asked they him what man is that which said unto thee
take up thy bed and walk?
and he that was healed wist not who it was for Jesus had
conveyed himself away a multitude being in that place.
afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple and said unto him
behold thou art made whole Sin no more lest a worse thing
come unto thee.
the man departed and told the Jews that it was Jesus which
had made him whole.
and therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus and sought to slay
him because he had done these things on the sabbath day.
but Jesus answered them my father worketh hitherto and I
work.
therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him because he not
only had broken the sabbath but said also that God was his
father making himself equal with God.
then answered Jesus and said unto them verily verily I say
unto you the son can do nothing of himself but what he seeth
the father do for what things soever he doeth these also
doeth the son likewise.
for the father loveth the son and sheweth him all things that
himself doeth and he will shew him greater works than these
that ye may marvel.
for as the father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them
even so the son quickeneth whom he will.
for the father judgeth no man but hath committed all judgment
unto the son
that all men should honour the son even as they honour the
father. he that honoureth not the son honoureth not the father
which hath sent him.
verily verily I say unto you he that heareth my word and
believeth on him that sent me hath everlasting life and
shall not come into condemnation but is passed from death
unto life.
verily verily I say unto you the hour is coming and now
is when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God and
they that hear shall live.
for as the father hath life in himself so hath he given to
the son to have life in himself
and hath given him authority to execute judgment also because
he is the son of man.
marvel not at this for the hour is coming in the which all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice
and shall come forth they that have done good unto the
resurrection of life and they that have done evil unto the
resurrection of damnation.
I can of mine own self do nothing as I hear I judge and my
judgment is just because I seek not mine own will but the
will of the father which hath sent me.
if I bear witness of myself my witness is not true.
there is another that beareth witness of me and I know that
the witness which he witnesseth of me is true.
ye sent unto John and he bare witness unto the truth.
but I receive not testimony from man but these things I say
that ye might be saved.
he was a burning and a shining light and ye were willing for
a season to rejoice in his light.
but I have greater witness than that of John for the works
which the father hath given me to finish the same works that
I do bear witness of me that the father hath sent me.
and the father himself which hath sent me hath borne witness
of me. ye have Neither heard his voice at any time nor seen
his shape.
and ye have not his word abiding in you for whom he hath
sent him ye believe not.
search the scriptures for in them ye think ye have eternal
life and they are they which testify of me.
and ye will not come to me that ye might have life.
I receive not honour from men.
but I know you that ye have not the love of God in you.
I Am come in my father s name and ye receive me not if
another shall come in his own name him ye will receive.
how can ye believe which receive honour one of another and
seek not the honour that cometh from God only?
do not think that I will accuse you to the father there is
one that accuseth you even Moses in whom ye trust.
for had ye believed Moses ye would have believed me for he
wrote of me.
but if ye believe not his writings how shall ye believe my
words?
after these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee which
is the sea of Tiberias.
and a great multitude followed him because they saw his
miracles which he did on them that were diseased.
and Jesus went up into a mountain and there he sat with his
disciples.
and the passover a feast of the Jews was nigh.
when Jesus then lifted up his eyes and saw a great company
come unto him he saith unto Philip whence shall we buy
bread that these may eat?
and this he said to prove him for he himself knew what he
would do.
Philip answered him two hundred pennyworth of bread is not
sufficient for them that every one of them may take a little.
one of his disciples Andrew Simon Peter s brother saith
unto him
there is a lad here which hath five barley loaves and two
small fishes but what are they among so many?
and Jesus said make the men sit down. now there was Much
grass in the place. so the men sat down in number about five
thousand.
and Jesus took the loaves and when he had given thanks he
distributed to the disciples and the disciples to them that
were set down and likewise of the fishes as Much as they
would.
when they were filled he said unto his disciples gather up
the fragments that remain that nothing be lost.
therefore they gathered them together and filled twelve
baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves which
remained over and above unto them that had eaten.
then those men when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did
said this is of a truth that prophet that should come into
the world.
when Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take
him by force to make him a king he departed again into a
mountain himself alone.
and when even was now come his disciples went down unto the
sea
and entered into a ship and went over the sea toward
Capernaum. and it was now dark and Jesus was not come to
them.
and the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew.
so when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty
furlongs they see Jesus walking on the sea and drawing nigh
unto the ship and they were afraid.
but he saith unto them it is I be not afraid.
then they willingly received him into the ship and
Immediately the ship was at the land whither they went.
the day following when the people which stood on the other
side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there save
that one whereinto his disciples were entered and that Jesus
went not with his disciples into the boat but that his
disciples were gone away alone
 howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias nigh unto the
place where they did eat bread after that the lord had given
thanks
when the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there
Neither his disciples they also took shipping and came to
Capernaum seeking for Jesus.
and when they had found him on the other side of the sea they
said unto him Rabbi when camest thou hither?
Jesus answered them and said verily verily I say unto you
ye seek me not because ye saw the miracles but because ye
did eat of the loaves and were filled.
labour not for the meat which perisheth but for that meat
which endureth unto everlasting life which the son of man
shall give unto you for him hath God the father sealed.
then said they unto him what shall we do that we might work
the works of God?
Jesus answered and said unto them this is the work of God
that ye believe on him whom he hath sent.
they said therefore unto him what sign shewest thou then
that we may see and believe thee? what dost thou work?
our fathers did eat Manna in the desert as it is written he
gave them bread from heaven to eat.
then Jesus said unto them verily verily I say unto you
Moses gave you not that bread from heaven but my father
giveth you the true bread from heaven.
for the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven and
giveth life unto the world.
then said they unto him lord evermore give us this bread.
and Jesus said unto them I Am the bread of life he that
cometh to me shall never hunger and he that believeth on me
shall never thirst.
but I said unto you that ye also have seen me and believe
not.
all that the father giveth me shall come to me and him that
cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.
for I came down from heaven not to do mine own will but the
will of him that sent me.
and this is the father s will which hath sent me that of all
which he hath given me I should lose nothing but should raise
it up again at the last day.
and this is the will of him that sent me that every one which
seeth the son and believeth on him may have everlasting
life and I will raise him up at the last day.
the Jews then murmured at him because he said I Am the bread
which came down from heaven.
and they said is not this Jesus the son of Joseph whose
father and mother we know? how is it then that he saith I
came down from heaven?
Jesus therefore answered and said unto them murmur not among
yourselves.
no man can come to me except the father which hath sent me
draw him and I will raise him up at the last day.
it is written in the prophets and they shall be all taught of
God. every man therefore that hath heard and hath learned of
the father cometh unto me.
not that any man hath seen the father save he which is of
God he hath seen the father.
verily verily I say unto you he that believeth on me hath
everlasting life.
I Am that bread of life.
your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness and are dead.
this is the bread which cometh down from heaven that a man
may eat thereof and not die.
I Am the living bread which came down from heaven if any man
eat of this bread he shall live for ever and the bread that
I will give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the
world.
the Jews therefore strove among themselves saying how can
this man give us his flesh to eat?
then Jesus said unto them verily verily I say unto you
except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his
blood ye have no life in you.
whoso eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath eternal
life and I will raise him up at the last day.
for my flesh is meat indeed and my blood is drink indeed.
he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood dwelleth in
me and I in him.
as the living father hath sent me and I live by the father
so he that eateth me even he shall live by me.
this is that bread which came down from heaven not as your
fathers did eat Manna and are dead he that eateth of this
bread shall live for ever.
these things said he in the synagogue as he taught in
Capernaum.
many therefore of his disciples when they had heard this
said this is an hard saying who can hear it?
when Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it
he said unto them doth this offend you?
what and if ye shall see the son of man ascend up where he was
before?
it is the spirit that quickeneth the flesh profiteth nothing
the words that I speak unto you they are spirit and they are
life.
but there are some of you that believe not. for Jesus knew
from the beginning who they were that believed not and who
should betray him.
and he said therefore said I unto you that no man can come
unto me except it were given unto him of my father.
from that time many of his disciples went back and walked no
more with him.
then said Jesus unto the twelve will ye also go away?
then Simon Peter answered him lord to whom shall we go? thou
hast the words of eternal life.
and we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ the son
of the living God.
Jesus answered them have not I chosen you twelve and one of
you is a devil?
he spake of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon for he it was
that should betray him being one of the twelve.
after these things Jesus walked in Galilee for he would not
walk in Jewry because the Jews sought to kill him.
now the Jew s feast of tabernacles was at hand.
his brethren therefore said unto him depart hence and go
into Judaea that thy disciples also may see the works that
thou doest.
for there is no man that doeth any thing in secret and he
himself seeketh to be known openly. if thou do these things
shew thyself to the world.
for Neither did his brethren believe in him.
then Jesus said unto them my time is not yet come but your
time is alway ready.
the world cannot hate you but me it hateth because I testify
of it that the works thereof are evil.
go ye up unto this feast I go not up yet unto this feast for
my time is not yet full come.
when he had said these words unto them he abode still in
Galilee.
but when his brethren were gone up then went he also up unto
the feast not openly but as it were in secret.
then the Jews sought him at the feast and said where is he?
and there was Much murmuring among the people concerning him
for some said he is a good man others said nay but he
deceiveth the people.
howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews.
now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the
temple and taught.
and the Jews marvelled saying how knoweth this man letters
having never learned?
Jesus answered them and said my doctrine is not mine but
his that sent me.
if any man will do his will he shall know of the doctrine
whether it be of God or whether I speak of myself.
he that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory but he that
seeketh his glory that sent him the same is true and no
unrighteousness is in him.
did not Moses give you the law and yet none of you keepeth
the law? why go ye about to kill me?
the people answered and said thou hast a devil who goeth
about to kill thee?
Jesus answered and said unto them I have done one work and
ye all marvel.
Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision not because it is
of Moses but of the fathers and ye on the sabbath day
circumcise a man.
if a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision that the law
of Moses should not be broken are ye angry at me because I
have made a man every whit whole on the sabbath day?
judge not according to the appearance but judge righteous
judgment.
then said some of them of Jerusalem is not this he whom they
seek to kill?
but lo he speaketh boldly and they say nothing unto him. do
the rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ?
howbeit we know this man whence he is but when Christ cometh
no man knoweth whence he is.
then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught saying ye both
know me and ye know whence I Am and I Am not come of myself
but he that sent me is true whom ye know not.
but I know him for I Am from him and he hath sent me.
then they sought to take him but no man laid hands on him
because his hour was not yet come.
and many of the people believed on him and said when Christ
cometh will he do more miracles than these which this man
hath done?
the Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things
concerning him and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent
officers to take him.
then said Jesus unto them yet a little while Am I with you
and then I go unto him that sent me.
ye shall seek me and shall not find me and where I Am
thither ye cannot come.
then said the Jews among themselves whither will he go that
we shall not find him? will he go unto the dispersed among the
Gentiles and teach the Gentiles?
what manner of saying is this that he said ye shall seek me
and shall not find me and where I Am thither ye cannot come?
in the last day that great day of the feast Jesus stood and
cried saying if any man thirst let him come unto me and
drink.
he that believeth on me as the scripture hath said out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water.
 but this spake he of the spirit which they that believe on
him should receive for the holy ghost was not yet given
because that Jesus was not yet glorified.
many of the people therefore when they heard this saying
said of a truth this is the prophet.
others said this is the Christ. but some said shall Christ
come out of Galilee?
hath not the scripture said that Christ cometh of the seed of
David and out of the town of Bethlehem where David was?
so there was a division among the people because of him.
and some of them would have taken him but no man laid hands
on him.
then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees and
they said unto them why have ye not brought him?
the officers answered never man spake like this man.
then answered them the Pharisees are ye also deceived?
have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him?
but this people who knoweth not the law are cursed.
Nicodemus saith unto them he that came to Jesus by night
being one of them
doth our law judge any man before it hear him and know what
he doeth?
they answered and said unto him art thou also of Galilee?
search and look for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet.
and every man went unto his own house.
Jesus went unto the mount of olives.
and early in the morning he came again into the temple and
all the people came unto him and he sat down and taught
them.
and the scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken
in adultery and when they had set her in the midst
they say unto him Master this woman was taken in adultery
in the very act.
now Moses in the law commanded us that such should be stoned
but what sayest thou?
this they said tempting him that they might have to accuse
him. but Jesus stooped down and with his finger wrote on the
ground as though he heard them not.
so when they continued asking him he lifted up himself and
said unto them he that is without Sin among you let him
first cast a stone at her.
and again he stooped down and wrote on the ground.
and they which heard it being convicted by their own
conscience went out one by one beginning at the eldest even
unto the last and Jesus was left alone and the woman
standing in the midst.
when Jesus had lifted up himself and saw none but the woman
he said unto her woman where are those thine accusers? hath
no man condemned thee?
she said no man lord. and Jesus said unto her Neither do I
condemn thee go and Sin no more.
then spake Jesus again unto them saying I Am the light of
the world he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness
but shall have the light of life.
the Pharisees therefore said unto him thou bearest record of
thyself thy record is not true.
Jesus answered and said unto them though I bear record of
myself yet my record is true for I know whence I came and
whither I go but ye cannot tell whence I come and whither I
go.
ye judge after the flesh I judge no man.
and yet if I judge my judgment is true for I Am not alone
but I and the father that sent me.
it is also written in your law that the testimony of two men
is true.
I Am one that bear witness of myself and the father that sent
me beareth witness of me.
then said they unto him where is thy father? Jesus answered
ye Neither know me nor my father if ye had known me ye
should have known my father also.
these words spake Jesus in the treasury as he taught in the
temple and no man laid hands on him for his hour was not yet
come.
then said Jesus again unto them I go my way and ye shall
seek me and shall die in your sins whither I go ye cannot
come.
then said the Jews will he kill himself? because he saith
whither I go ye cannot come.
and he said unto them ye are from beneath I Am from above
ye are of this world I Am not of this world.
I said therefore unto you that ye shall die in your sins for
if ye believe not that I Am he ye shall die in your sins.
then said they unto him who art thou? and Jesus saith unto
them even the same that I said unto you from the beginning.
I have many things to say and to judge of you but he that
sent me is true and I speak to the world those things which I
have heard of him.
they understood not that he spake to them of the father.
then said Jesus unto them when ye have lifted up the son of
man then shall ye know that I Am he and that I do nothing of
myself but as my father hath taught me I speak these things.
and he that sent me is with me the father hath not left me
alone for I do always those things that please him.
as he spake these words many believed on him.
then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him if ye
continue in my word then are ye my disciples indeed
and ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you
free.
they answered him we be Abraham s seed and were never in
bondage to any man how sayest thou ye shall be made free?
Jesus answered them verily verily I say unto you whosoever
committeth Sin is the servant of Sin.
and the servant abideth not in the house for ever but the son
abideth ever.
if the son therefore shall make you free ye shall be free
indeed.
I know that ye are Abraham s seed but ye seek to kill me
because my word hath no place in you.
I speak that which I have seen with my father and ye do that
which ye have seen with your father.
they answered and said unto him Abraham is our father. Jesus
saith unto them if ye were Abraham s children ye would do
the works of Abraham.
but now ye seek to kill me a man that hath told you the
truth which I have heard of God this did not Abraham.
ye do the deeds of your father. then said they to him we be
not born of fornication we have one father even God.
Jesus said unto them if God were your father ye would love
me for I proceeded forth and came from God Neither came I of
myself but he sent me.
why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot
hear my word.
ye are of your father the devil and the lusts of your father
ye will do. he was a murderer from the beginning and abode
not in the truth because there is no truth in him. when he
speaketh a lie he speaketh of his own for he is a liar and
the father of it.
and because I tell you the truth ye believe me not.
which of you convinceth me of Sin? and if I say the truth why
do ye not believe me?
he that is of God heareth God s words ye therefore hear them
not because ye are not of God.
then answered the Jews and said unto him say we not well
that thou art a Samaritan and hast a devil?
Jesus answered I have not a devil but I honour my father
and ye do dishonour me.
and I seek not mine own glory there is one that seeketh and
judgeth.
verily verily I say unto you if a man keep my saying he
shall never see death.
then said the Jews unto him now we know that thou hast a
devil. Abraham is dead and the prophets and thou sayest if
a man keep my saying he shall never taste of death.
art thou greater than our father Abraham which is dead? and
the prophets are dead whom makest thou thyself?
Jesus answered if I honour myself my honour is nothing it
is my father that honoureth me of whom ye say that he is
your God
yet ye have not known him but I know him and if I should
say I know him not I shall be a liar like unto you but I
know him and keep his saying.
your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day and he saw it and
was glad.
then said the Jews unto him thou art not yet fifty years old
and hast thou seen Abraham?
Jesus said unto them verily verily I say unto you before
Abraham was I Am.
then took they up stones to cast at him but Jesus hid
himself and went out of the temple going through the midst
of them and so passed by.
and as Jesus passed by he saw a man which was blind from his
birth.
and his disciples asked him saying Master who did Sin this
man or his parents that he was born blind?
Jesus answered Neither hath this man sinned nor his parents
but that the works of God should be made manifest in him.
I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day
the night cometh when no man can work.
as long as I Am in the world I Am the light of the world.
when he had thus spoken he spat on the ground and made clay
of the spittle and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with
the clay
and said unto him go wash in the pool of Siloam which is
by interpretation sent. he went his way therefore and
washed and came seeing.
the neighbours therefore and they which before had seen him
that he was blind said is not this he that sat and begged?
some said this is he others said he is like him but he
said I Am he.
therefore said they unto him how were thine eyes opened?
he answered and said a man that is called Jesus made clay
and anointed mine eyes and said unto me go to the pool of
Siloam and wash and I went and washed and I received sight.
then said they unto him where is he? he said I know not.
they brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind.
and it was the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay and
opened his eyes.
then again the Pharisees also asked him how he had received
his sight. he said unto them he put clay upon mine eyes and
I washed and do see.
therefore said some of the Pharisees this man is not of God
because he keepeth not the sabbath day. others said how can a
man that is a sinner do such miracles? and there was a
division among them.
they say unto the blind man again what sayest thou of him
that he hath opened thine eyes? he said he is a prophet.
but the Jews did not believe concerning him that he had been
blind and received his sight until they called the parents
of him that had received his sight.
and they asked them saying is this your son who ye say was
born blind? how then doth he now see?
his parents answered them and said we know that this is our
son and that he was born blind
but by what means he now seeth we know not or who hath
opened his eyes we know not he is of age ask him he shall
speak for himself.
these words spake his parents because they feared the Jews
for the Jews had agreed already that if any man did confess
that he was Christ he should be put out of the synagogue.
therefore said his parents he is of age ask him.
then again called they the man that was blind and said unto
him give God the praise we know that this man is a sinner.
he answered and said whether he be a sinner or no I know
not one thing I know that whereas I was blind now I see.
then said they to him again what did he to thee? how opened
he thine eyes?
he answered them I have told you already and ye did not
hear wherefore would ye hear it again? will ye also be his
disciples?
then they reviled him and said thou art his disciple but we
are Moses disciples.
we know that God spake unto Moses as for this fellow we know
not from whence he is.
the man answered and said unto them why herein is a
marvellous thing that ye know not from whence he is and yet
he hath opened mine eyes.
now we know that God heareth not sinners but if any man be a
worshipper of God and doeth his will him he heareth.
since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the
eyes of one that was born blind.
if this man were not of God he could do nothing.
they answered and said unto him thou wast altogether born in
sins and dost thou teach us? and they cast him out.
Jesus heard that they had cast him out and when he had found
him he said unto him dost thou believe on the son of God?
he answered and said who is he lord that I might believe on
him?
and Jesus said unto him thou hast both seen him and it is he
that talketh with thee.
and he said lord I believe. and he worshipped him.
and Jesus said for judgment I Am come into this world that
they which see not might see and that they which see might be
made blind.
and some of the Pharisees which were with him heard these
words and said unto him are we blind also?
Jesus said unto them if ye were blind ye should have no Sin
but now ye say we see therefore your Sin remaineth.
verily verily I say unto you he that entereth not by the
door into the sheepfold but climbeth up some other way the
same is a thief and a robber.
but he that entereth in by the door is the Shepherd of the
sheep.
to him the porter openeth and the sheep hear his voice and
he calleth his own sheep by name and leadeth them out.
and when he putteth forth his own sheep he goeth before them
and the sheep follow him for they know his voice.
and a stranger will they not follow but will flee from him
for they know not the voice of strangers.
this parable spake Jesus unto them but they understood not
what things they were which he spake unto them.
then said Jesus unto them again verily verily I say unto
you I Am the door of the sheep.
all that ever came before me are thieves and robbers but the
sheep did not hear them.
I Am the door by me if any man enter in he shall be saved
and shall go in and out and find pasture.
the thief cometh not but for to steal and to kill and to
destroy I Am come that they might have life and that they
might have it more abundantly.
I Am the good Shepherd the good Shepherd giveth his life for
the sheep.
but he that is an hireling and not the Shepherd whose own
the sheep are not seeth the wolf coming and leaveth the
sheep and fleeth and the wolf catcheth them and scattereth
the sheep.
the hireling fleeth because he is an hireling and careth not
for the sheep.
I Am the good Shepherd and know my sheep and Am known of
mine.
as the father knoweth me even so know I the father and I lay
down my life for the sheep.
and other sheep I have which are not of this fold them also
I must bring and they shall hear my voice and there shall be
one fold and one Shepherd.
therefore doth my father love me because I lay down my life
that I might take it again.
no man taketh it from me but I lay it down of myself. I have
power to lay it down and I have power to take it again. this
commandment have I received of my father.
there was a division therefore again among the Jews for these
sayings.
and many of them said he hath a devil and is mad why hear
ye him?
others said these are not the words of him that hath a devil.
can a devil open the eyes of the blind?
and it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication and it
was winter.
and Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon s porch.
then came the Jews round about him and said unto him how
long dost thou make us to doubt? if thou be the Christ tell
us plainly.
Jesus answered them I told you and ye believed not the
works that I do in my father s name they bear witness of me.
but ye believe not because ye are not of my sheep as I said
unto you.
my sheep hear my voice and I know them and they follow me
and I give unto them eternal life and they shall never
perish Neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.
my father which gave them me is greater than all and no man
is able to pluck them out of my father s hand.
I and my father are one.
then the Jews took up stones again to stone him.
Jesus answered them many good works have I shewed you from my
father for which of those works do ye stone me?
the Jews answered him saying for a good work we stone thee
not but for blasphemy and because that thou being a man
makest thyself God.
Jesus answered them is it not written in your law I said ye
are gods?
if he called them gods unto whom the word of God came and
the scripture cannot be broken
say ye of him whom the father hath sanctified and sent into
the world thou blasphemest because I said I Am the son of
God?
if I do not the works of my father believe me not.
but if I do though ye believe not me believe the works that
ye may know and believe that the father is in me and I in
him.
therefore they sought again to take him but he escaped out of
their hand
and went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John at
first baptized and there he abode.
and many resorted unto him and said John did no miracle but
all things that John spake of this man were true.
and many believed on him there.
now a certain man was sick named Lazarus of Bethany the
town of Mary and her sister Martha.
 it was that Mary which anointed the lord with ointment and
wiped his feet with her hair whose brother Lazarus was sick.
therefore his sisters sent unto him saying lord behold he
whom thou lovest is sick.
when Jesus heard that he said this sickness is not unto
death but for the glory of God that the son of God might be
glorified thereby.
now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
when he had heard therefore that he was sick he abode two
days still in the same place where he was.
then after that saith he to his disciples let us go into
Judaea again.
his disciples say unto him Master the Jews of late sought to
stone thee and goest thou thither again?
Jesus answered are there not twelve hours in the day? if any
man walk in the day he stumbleth not because he seeth the
light of this world.
but if a man walk in the night he stumbleth because there is
no light in him.
these things said he and after that he saith unto them our
friend Lazarus sleepeth but I go that I may awake him out of
sleep.
then said his disciples lord if he sleep he shall do well.
howbeit Jesus spake of his death but they thought that he had
spoken of taking of rest in sleep.
then said Jesus unto them plainly Lazarus is dead.
and I Am glad for your sakes that I was not there to the
intent ye may believe nevertheless let us go unto him.
then said Thomas which is called Didymus unto his
fellowdisciples let us also go that we may die with him.
then when Jesus came he found that he had lain in the grave
four days already.
now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem about fifteen furlongs
off
and many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary to comfort them
concerning their brother.
then Martha as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming went
and met him but Mary sat still in the house.
then said Martha unto Jesus lord if thou hadst been here my
brother had not died.
but I know that even now whatsoever thou wilt ask of God
God will give it thee.
Jesus saith unto her thy brother shall rise again.
Martha saith unto him I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day.
Jesus said unto her I Am the resurrection and the life he
that believeth in me though he were dead yet shall he live
and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die.
believest thou this?
she saith unto him yea lord I believe that thou art the
Christ the son of God which should come into the world.
and when she had so said she went her way and called Mary
her sister secretly saying the Master is come and calleth
for thee.
as soon as she heard that she arose quickly and came unto
him.
now Jesus was not yet come into the town but was in that
place where Martha met him.
the Jews then which were with her in the house and comforted
her when they saw Mary that she rose up hastily and went
out followed her saying she goeth unto the grave to weep
there.
then when Mary was come where Jesus was and saw him she fell
down at his feet saying unto him lord if thou hadst been
here my brother had not died.
when Jesus therefore saw her weeping and the Jews also
weeping which came with her he groaned in the spirit and was
troubled.
and said where have ye laid him? they said unto him lord
come and see.
Jesus wept.
then said the Jews behold how he loved him
and some of them said could not this man which opened the
eyes of the blind have caused that even this man should not
have died?
Jesus therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the grave.
it was a cave and a stone lay upon it.
Jesus said take ye away the stone. Martha the sister of him
that was dead saith unto him lord by this time he stinketh
for he hath been dead four days.
Jesus saith unto her said I not unto thee that if thou
wouldest believe thou shouldest see the glory of God?
then they took away the stone from the place where the dead
was laid. and Jesus lifted up his eyes and said father I
thank thee that thou hast heard me.
and I knew that thou hearest me always but because of the
people which stand by I said it that they may believe that
thou hast sent me.
and when he thus had spoken he cried with a loud voice
Lazarus come forth.
and he that was dead came forth bound hand and foot with
graveclothes and his face was bound about with a napkin.
Jesus saith unto them loose him and let him go.
then many of the Jews which came to Mary and had seen the
things which Jesus did believed on him.
but some of them went their ways to the Pharisees and told
them what things Jesus had done.
then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council
and said what do we? for this man doeth many miracles.
if we let him thus alone all men will believe on him and the
Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation.
and one of them named Caiaphas being the high priest that
same year said unto them ye know nothing at all
nor consider that it is expedient for us that one man should
die for the people and that the whole nation perish not.
and this spake he not of himself but being high priest that
year he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation
and not for that nation only but that also he should gather
together in one the children of God that were scattered
abroad.
then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put
him to death.
Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews but went
thence unto a country near to the wilderness into a city
called Ephraim and there continued with his disciples.
and the Jews passover was nigh at hand and many went out of
the country up to Jerusalem before the passover to purify
themselves.
then sought they for Jesus and spake among themselves as
they stood in the temple what think ye that he will not come
to the feast?
now both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a
commandment that if any man knew where he were he should
shew it that they might take him.
then Jesus six days before the passover came to Bethany where
Lazarus was which had been dead whom he raised from the
dead.
there they made him a supper and Martha served but Lazarus
was one of them that sat at the table with him.
then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard very costly
and anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her
hair and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.
then saith one of his disciples Judas Iscariot Simon s son
which should betray him
why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence and
given to the poor?
this he said not that he cared for the poor but because he
was a thief and had the bag and bare what was put therein.
then said Jesus let her alone against the day of my burying
hath she kept this.
for the poor always ye have with you but me ye have not
always.
Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there and
they came not for Jesus sake only but that they might see
Lazarus also whom he had raised from the dead.
but the chief priests consulted that they might put Lazarus
also to death
because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away and
believed on Jesus.
on the next day Much people that were come to the feast when
they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem
took branches of palm trees and went forth to meet him and
cried Hosanna blessed is the king of Israel that cometh in
the name of the lord.
and Jesus when he had found a young ass sat thereon as it
is written
fear not daughter of Sion behold thy king cometh sitting
on an ass s colt.
these things understood not his disciples at the first but
when Jesus was glorified then remembered they that these
things were written of him and that they had done these
things unto him.
the people therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus
out of his grave and raised him from the dead bare record.
for this cause the people also met him for that they heard
that he had done this miracle.
the Pharisees therefore said among themselves perceive ye how
ye prevail nothing? behold the world is gone after him.
and there were certain Greeks among them that came up to
worship at the feast
the same came therefore to Philip which was of Bethsaida of
Galilee and desired him saying Sir we would see Jesus.
Philip cometh and telleth Andrew and again Andrew and Philip
tell Jesus.
and Jesus answered them saying the hour is come that the
son of man should be glorified.
verily verily I say unto you except a corn of wheat fall
into the ground and die it abideth alone but if it die it
bringeth forth Much fruit.
he that loveth his life shall lose it and he that hateth his
life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.
if any man serve me let him follow me and where I Am there
shall also my servant be if any man serve me him will my
father honour.
now is my soul troubled and what shall I say? father save me
from this hour but for this cause came I unto this hour.
father glorify thy name. then came there a voice from heaven
saying I have both glorified it and will glorify it again.
the people therefore that stood by and heard it said that
it thundered others said an angel spake to him.
Jesus answered and said this voice came not because of me
but for your sakes.
now is the judgment of this world now shall the prince of
this world be cast out.
and I if I be lifted up from the earth will draw all men
unto me.
this he said signifying what death he should die.
the people answered him we have heard out of the law that
Christ abideth for ever and how sayest thou the son of man
must be lifted up? who is this son of man?
then Jesus said unto them yet a little while is the light
with you. walk while ye have the light lest darkness come
upon you for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither
he goeth.
while ye have light believe in the light that ye may be the
children of light. these things spake Jesus and departed and
did hide himself from them.
but though he had done so many miracles before them yet they
believed not on him
that the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled
which he spake lord who hath believed our report? and to
whom hath the arm of the lord been revealed?
therefore they could not believe because that Esaias said
again
he hath blinded their eyes and hardened their heart that
they should not see with their eyes nor understand with their
heart and be converted and I should heal them.
these things said Esaias when he saw his glory and spake of
him.
nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him
but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him lest
they should be put out of the synagogue
for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.
Jesus cried and said he that believeth on me believeth not
on me but on him that sent me.
and he that seeth me seeth him that sent me.
I Am come a light into the world that whosoever believeth on
me should not abide in darkness.
and if any man hear my words and believe not I judge him
not for I came not to judge the world but to save the world.
he that rejecteth me and receiveth not my words hath one
that judgeth him the word that I have spoken the same shall
judge him in the last day.
for I have not spoken of myself but the father which sent me
he gave me a commandment what I should say and what I should
speak.
and I know that his commandment is life everlasting
whatsoever I speak therefore even as the father said unto me
so I speak.
now before the feast of the passover when Jesus knew that his
hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the
father having loved his own which were in the world he loved
them unto the end.
and supper being ended the devil having now put into the
heart of Judas Iscariot Simon s son to betray him
Jesus knowing that the father had given all things into his
hands and that he was come from God and went to God
he riseth from supper and laid aside his garments and took a
towel and girded himself.
after that he poureth water into a bason and began to wash
the disciples feet and to wipe them with the towel wherewith
he was girded.
then cometh he to Simon Peter and Peter saith unto him lord
dost thou wash my feet?
Jesus answered and said unto him what I do thou knowest not
now but thou shalt know hereafter.
Peter saith unto him thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus
answered him if I wash thee not thou hast no part with me.
Simon Peter saith unto him lord not my feet only but also
my hands and my head.
Jesus saith to him he that is washed needeth not save to wash
his feet but is clean every whit and ye are clean but not
all.
for he knew who should betray him therefore said he ye are
not all clean.
so after he had washed their feet and had taken his garments
and was set down again he said unto them know ye what I have
done to you?
ye call me Master and lord and ye say well for so I Am.
if I then your lord and Master have washed your feet ye
also ought to wash one another s feet.
for I have given you an example that ye should do as I have
done to you.
verily verily I say unto you the servant is not greater
than his lord Neither he that is sent greater than he that
sent him.
if ye know these things happy are ye if ye do them.
I speak not of you all I know whom I have chosen but that
the scripture may be fulfilled he that eateth bread with me
hath lifted up his heel against me.
now I tell you before it come that when it is come to pass
ye may believe that I Am he.
verily verily I say unto you he that receiveth whomsoever I
send receiveth me and he that receiveth me receiveth him that
sent me.
when Jesus had thus said he was troubled in spirit and
testified and said verily verily I say unto you that one
of you shall betray me.
then the disciples looked one on another doubting of whom he
spake.
now there was leaning on Jesus bosom one of his disciples
whom Jesus loved.
Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him that he should ask who
it should be of whom he spake.
he then lying on Jesus breast saith unto him lord who is
it?
Jesus answered he it is to whom I shall give a sop when I
have dipped it. and when he had dipped the sop he gave it to
Judas Iscariot the son of Simon.
and after the sop Satan entered into him. then said Jesus unto
him that thou doest do quickly.
now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this
unto him.
for some of them thought because Judas had the bag that
Jesus had said unto him buy those things that we have need of
against the feast or that he should give something to the
poor.
he then having received the sop went Immediately out and it
was night.
therefore when he was gone out Jesus said now is the son of
man glorified and God is glorified in him.
if God be glorified in him God shall also glorify him in
himself and shall straightway glorify him.
little children yet a little while I Am with you. ye shall
seek me and as I said unto the Jews whither I go ye cannot
come so now I say to you.
a new commandment I give unto you that ye love one another
as I have loved you that ye also love one another.
by this shall all men know that ye are my disciples if ye
have love one to another.
Simon Peter said unto him lord whither goest thou? Jesus
answered him whither I go thou canst not follow me now but
thou shalt follow me afterwards.
Peter said unto him lord why cannot I follow thee now? I
will lay down my life for thy sake.
Jesus answered him wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake?
verily verily I say unto thee the cock shall not crow till
thou hast denied me thrice.
let not your heart be troubled ye believe in God believe
also in me.
in my father s house are many mansions if it were not so I
would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.
and if I go and prepare a place for you I will come again
and receive you unto myself that where I Am there ye may be
also.
and whither I go ye know and the way ye know.
Thomas saith unto him lord we know not whither thou goest
and how can we know the way?
Jesus saith unto him I Am the way the truth and the life
no man cometh unto the father but by me.
if ye had known me ye should have known my father also and
from henceforth ye know him and have seen him.
Philip saith unto him lord shew us the father and it
sufficeth us.
Jesus saith unto him have I been so long time with you and
yet hast thou not known me Philip? he that hath seen me hath
seen the father and how sayest thou then shew us the father?
believest thou not that I Am in the father and the father in
me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself but
the father that dwelleth in me he doeth the works.
believe me that I Am in the father and the father in me or
else believe me for the very works sake.
verily verily I say unto you he that believeth on me the
works that I do shall he do also and greater works than these
shall he do because I go unto my father.
and whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I do that
the father may be glorified in the son.
if ye shall ask any thing in my name I will do it.
if ye love me keep my commandments.
and I will pray the father and he shall give you another
comforter that he may abide with you for ever
even the spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive
because it seeth him not Neither knoweth him but ye know
him for he dwelleth with you and shall be in you.
I will not leave you comfortless I will come to you.
yet a little while and the world seeth me no more but ye see
me because I live ye shall live also.
at that day ye shall know that I Am in my father and ye in
me and I in you.
he that hath my commandments and keepeth them he it is that
loveth me and he that loveth me shall be loved of my father
and I will love him and will manifest myself to him.
Judas saith unto him not Iscariot lord how is it that thou
wilt manifest thyself unto us and not unto the world?
Jesus answered and said unto him if a man love me he will
keep my words and my father will love him and we will come
unto him and make our abode with him.
he that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings and the word
which ye hear is not mine but the father s which sent me.
these things have I spoken unto you being yet present with
you.
but the comforter which is the holy ghost whom the father
will send in my name he shall teach you all things and bring
all things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto
you.
peace I leave with you my peace I give unto you not as the
world giveth give I unto you. let not your heart be troubled
Neither let it be afraid.
ye have heard how I said unto you I go away and come again
unto you. if ye loved me ye would rejoice because I said I
go unto the father for my father is greater than I.
and now I have told you before it come to pass that when it
is come to pass ye might believe.
hereafter I will not talk Much with you for the prince of
this world cometh and hath nothing in me.
but that the world may know that I love the father and as the
father gave me commandment even so I do. Arise let us go
hence.
I Am the true vine and my father is the husbandman.
every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away and
every branch that beareth fruit he purgeth it that it may
bring forth more fruit.
now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto
you.
abide in me and I in you. as the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself except it abide in the vine no more can ye except ye
abide in me.
I Am the vine ye are the branches he that abideth in me and
I in him the same bringeth forth Much fruit for without me
ye can do nothing.
if a man abide not in me he is cast forth as a branch and is
withered and men gather them and cast them into the fire
and they are burned.
if ye abide in me and my words abide in you ye shall ask
what ye will and it shall be done unto you.
herein is my father glorified that ye bear Much fruit so
shall ye be my disciples.
as the father hath loved me so have I loved you continue ye
in my love.
if ye keep my commandments ye shall abide in my love even as
I have kept my father s commandments and abide in his love.
these things have I spoken unto you that my joy might remain
in you and that your joy might be full.
this is my commandment that ye love one another as I have
loved you.
greater love hath no man than this that a man lay down his
life for his friends.
ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you.
henceforth I call you not servants for the servant knoweth
not what his lord doeth but I have called you friends for
all things that I have heard of my father I have made known
unto you.
ye have not chosen me but I have chosen you and ordained
you that ye should go and bring forth fruit and that your
fruit should remain that whatsoever ye shall ask of the
father in my name he may give it you.
these things I command you that ye love one another.
if the world hate you ye know that it hated me before it
hated you.
if ye were of the world the world would love his own but
because ye are not of the world but I have chosen you out of
the world therefore the world hateth you.
remember the word that I said unto you the servant is not
greater than his lord. if they have persecuted me they will
also persecute you if they have kept my saying they will
keep yours also.
but all these things will they do unto you for my name s sake
because they know not him that sent me.
if I had not come and spoken unto them they had not had Sin
but now they have no cloak for their Sin.
he that hateth me hateth my father also.
if I had not done among them the works which none other man
did they had not had Sin but now have they both seen and
hated both me and my father.
but this cometh to pass that the word might be fulfilled that
is written in their law they hated me without a cause.
but when the comforter is come whom I will send unto you from
the father even the spirit of truth which proceedeth from
the father he shall testify of me
and ye also shall bear witness because ye have been with me
from the beginning.
these things have I spoken unto you that ye should not be
offended.
they shall put you out of the synagogues yea the time
cometh that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth
God service.
and these things will they do unto you because they have not
known the father nor me.
but these things have I told you that when the time shall
come ye may remember that I told you of them. and these
things I said not unto you at the beginning because I was
with you.
but now I go my way to him that sent me and none of you
asketh me whither goest thou?
but because I have said these things unto you sorrow hath
filled your heart.
nevertheless I tell you the truth it is expedient for you
that I go away for if I go not away the comforter will not
come unto you but if I depart I will send him unto you.
and when he is come he will reprove the world of Sin and of
righteousness and of judgment
of Sin because they believe not on me
of righteousness because I go to my father and ye see me no
more
of judgment because the prince of this world is judged.
I have yet many things to say unto you but ye cannot bear
them now.
howbeit when he the spirit of truth is come he will guide
you into all truth for he shall not speak of himself but
whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak and he will
shew you things to come.
he shall glorify me for he shall receive of mine and shall
shew it unto you.
all things that the father hath are mine therefore said I
that he shall take of mine and shall shew it unto you.
a little while and ye shall not see me and again a little
while and ye shall see me because I go to the father.
then said some of his disciples among themselves what is this
that he saith unto us a little while and ye shall not see
me and again a little while and ye shall see me and
because I go to the father?
they said therefore what is this that he saith a little
while? we cannot tell what he saith.
now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him and said
unto them do ye enquire among yourselves of that I said a
little while and ye shall not see me and again a little
while and ye shall see me?
verily verily I say unto you that ye shall weep and lament
but the world shall rejoice and ye shall be sorrowful but
your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
a woman when she is in travail hath sorrow because her hour
is come but as soon as she is delivered of the child she
remembereth no more the anguish for joy that a man is born
into the world.
and ye now therefore have sorrow but I will see you again
and your heart shall rejoice and your joy no man taketh from
you.
and in that day ye shall ask me nothing. verily verily I say
unto you whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name he
will give it you.
hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name ask and ye shall
receive that your joy may be full.
these things have I spoken unto you in proverbs but the time
cometh when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs but I
shall shew you plainly of the father.
at that day ye shall ask in my name and I say not unto you
that I will pray the father for you
for the father himself loveth you because ye have loved me
and have believed that I came out from God.
I came forth from the father and Am come into the world
again I leave the world and go to the father.
his disciples said unto him lo now speakest thou plainly
and speakest no proverb.
now are we sure that thou knowest all things and needest not
that any man should ask thee by this we believe that thou
camest forth from God.
Jesus answered them do ye now believe?
behold the hour cometh yea is now come that ye shall be
scattered every man to his own and shall leave me alone and
yet I Am not alone because the father is with me.
these things I have spoken unto you that in me ye might have
peace. in the world ye shall have tribulation but be of good
cheer I have overcome the world.
these words spake Jesus and lifted up his eyes to heaven and
said father the hour is come glorify thy son that thy son
also may glorify thee
as thou hast given him power over all flesh that he should
give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.
and this is life eternal that they might know thee the only
true God and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.
I have glorified thee on the earth I have finished the work
which thou Gavest me to do.
and now O father glorify thou me with thine own self with
the glory which I had with thee before the world was.
I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou Gavest me
out of the world thine they were and thou Gavest them me
and they have kept thy word.
now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given
me are of thee.
for I have given unto them the words which thou Gavest me and
they have received them and have known surely that I came out
from thee and they have believed that thou didst send me.
I pray for them I pray not for the world but for them which
thou hast given me for they are thine.
and all mine are thine and thine are mine and I Am glorified
in them.
and now I Am no more in the world but these are in the world
and I come to thee. holy father keep through thine own name
those whom thou hast given me that they may be one as we
are.
while I was with them in the world I kept them in thy name
those that thou Gavest me I have kept and none of them is
lost but the son of perdition that the scripture might be
fulfilled.
and now come I to thee and these things I speak in the world
that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.
I have given them thy word and the world hath hated them
because they are not of the world even as I Am not of the
world.
I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world but
that thou shouldest keep them from the evil.
they are not of the world even as I Am not of the world.
sanctify them through thy truth thy word is truth.
as thou hast sent me into the world even so have I also sent
them into the world.
and for their sakes I sanctify myself that they also might be
sanctified through the truth.
Neither pray I for these alone but for them also which shall
believe on me through their word
that they all may be one as thou father art in me and I in
thee that they also may be one in us that the world may
believe that thou hast sent me.
and the glory which thou Gavest me I have given them that
they may be one even as we are one
I in them and thou in me that they may be made perfect in
one and that the world may know that thou hast sent me and
hast loved them as thou hast loved me.
father I will that they also whom thou hast given me be
with me where I Am that they may behold my glory which thou
hast given me for thou lovedst me before the foundation of
the world.
O righteous father the world hath not known thee but I have
known thee and these have known that thou hast sent me.
and I have declared unto them thy name and will declare it
that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them and
I in them.
when Jesus had spoken these words he went forth with his
disciples over the brook Cedron where was a garden into the
which he entered and his disciples.
and Judas also which betrayed him knew the place for Jesus
ofttimes resorted thither with his disciples.
Judas then having received a band of men and officers from
the chief priests and Pharisees cometh thither with lanterns
and torches and weapons.
Jesus therefore knowing all things that should come upon him
went forth and said unto them whom seek ye?
they answered him Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith unto them I
Am he. and Judas also which betrayed him stood with them.
as soon then as he had said unto them I Am he they went
backward and fell to the ground.
then asked he them again whom seek ye? and they said Jesus
of Nazareth.
Jesus answered I have told you that I Am he if therefore ye
seek me let these go their way
that the saying might be fulfilled which he spake of them
which thou Gavest me have I lost none.
then Simon Peter having a sword drew it and smote the high
priest s servant and cut off his right ear. the servant s
name was Malchus.
then said Jesus unto Peter put up thy sword into the sheath
the cup which my father hath given me shall I not drink it?
then the band and the captain and officers of the Jews took
Jesus and bound him
and led him away to Annas first for he was father in law to
Caiaphas which was the high priest that same year.
now Caiaphas was he which gave counsel to the Jews that it
was expedient that one man should die for the people.
and Simon Peter followed Jesus and so did another disciple
that disciple was known unto the high priest and went in with
Jesus into the palace of the high priest.
but Peter stood at the door without. then went out that other
disciple which was known unto the high priest and spake unto
her that kept the door and brought in Peter.
then saith the damsel that kept the door unto Peter art not
thou also one of this man s disciples? he saith I Am not.
and the servants and officers stood there who had made a fire
of coals for it was cold and they warmed themselves and
Peter stood with them and warmed himself.
the high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples and of his
doctrine.
Jesus answered him I spake openly to the world I ever taught
in the synagogue and in the temple whither the Jews always
resort and in secret have I said nothing.
why askest thou me? ask them which heard me what I have said
unto them behold they know what I said.
and when he had thus spoken one of the officers which stood
by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand saying answerest
thou the high priest so?
Jesus answered him if I have spoken evil bear witness of the
evil but if well why smitest thou me?
now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest.
and Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. they said therefore
unto him art not thou also one of his disciples? he denied
it and said I Am not.
one of the servants of the high priest being his kinsman
whose ear Peter cut off saith did not I see thee in the
garden with him?
Peter then denied again and Immediately the cock crew.
then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment
and it was early and they themselves went not into the
judgment hall lest they should be defiled but that they
might eat the passover.
Pilate then went out unto them and said what accusation
bring ye against this man?
they answered and said unto him if he were not a malefactor
we would not have delivered him up unto thee.
then said Pilate unto them take ye him and judge him
according to your law. the Jews therefore said unto him it is
not lawful for us to put any man to death
that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled which he spake
signifying what death he should die.
then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again and called
Jesus and said unto him art thou the king of the Jews?
Jesus answered him sayest thou this thing of thyself or did
others tell it thee of me?
Pilate answered Am I a Jew? thine own nation and the chief
priests have delivered thee unto me what hast thou done?
Jesus answered my kingdom is not of this world if my kingdom
were of this world then would my servants fight that I
should not be delivered to the Jews but now is my kingdom not
from hence.
Pilate therefore said unto him art thou a king then? Jesus
answered thou sayest that I Am a king. to this end was I
born and for this cause came I into the world that I should
bear witness unto the truth. every one that is of the truth
heareth my voice.
Pilate saith unto him what is truth? and when he had said
this he went out again unto the Jews and saith unto them I
find in him no fault at all.
but ye have a custom that I should release unto you one at
the passover will ye therefore that I release unto you the
king of the Jews?
then cried they all again saying not this man but Barabbas.
now Barabbas was a robber.
then Pilate therefore took Jesus and scourged him.
and the soldiers platted a crown of thorns and put it on his
head and they put on him a purple robe
and said hail king of the Jews and they smote him with
their hands.
Pilate therefore went forth again and saith unto them
behold I bring him forth to you that ye may know that I find
no fault in him.
then came Jesus forth wearing the crown of thorns and the
purple robe. and Pilate saith unto them behold the man
when the chief priests therefore and officers saw him they
cried out saying crucify him crucify him. Pilate saith unto
them take ye him and crucify him for I find no fault in
him.
the Jews answered him we have a law and by our law he ought
to die because he made himself the son of God.
when Pilate therefore heard that saying he was the more
afraid
and went again into the judgment hall and saith unto Jesus
whence art thou? but Jesus gave him no answer.
then saith Pilate unto him speakest thou not unto me? knowest
thou not that I have power to crucify thee and have power to
release thee?
Jesus answered thou couldest have no power at all against me
except it were given thee from above therefore he that
delivered me unto thee hath the greater Sin.
and from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him but the
Jews cried out saying if thou let this man go thou art not
Caesar s friend whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh
against Caesar.
when Pilate therefore heard that saying he brought Jesus
forth and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is
called the pavement but in the Hebrew Gabbatha.
and it was the preparation of the passover and about the
sixth hour and he saith unto the Jews behold your king
but they cried out away with him away with him crucify him.
Pilate saith unto them shall I crucify your king? the chief
priests answered we have no king but Caesar.
then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. and
they took Jesus and led him away.
and he bearing his cross went forth into a place called the
place of a skull which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha
where they crucified him and two other with him on either
side one and Jesus in the midst.
and Pilate wrote a title and put it on the cross. and the
writing was Jesus of Nazareth the king of the Jews.
this title then read many of the Jews for the place where
Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city and it was written
in Hebrew and Greek and Latin.
then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate write not
the king of the Jews but that he said I Am king of the Jews.
Pilate answered what I have written I have written.
then the soldiers when they had crucified Jesus took his
garments and made four parts to every soldier a part and
also his coat now the coat was without seam woven from the
top throughout.
they said therefore among themselves let us not rend it but
cast lots for it whose it shall be that the scripture might
be fulfilled which saith they parted my raiment among them
and for my vesture they did cast lots. these things therefore
the soldiers did.
now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother and his
mother s sister Mary the wife of Cleophas and Mary
Magdalene.
when Jesus therefore saw his mother and the disciple standing
by whom he loved he saith unto his mother woman behold thy
son
then saith he to the disciple behold thy mother and from
that hour that disciple took her unto his own home.
after this Jesus knowing that all things were now
accomplished that the scripture might be fulfilled saith I
thirst.
now there was set a vessel full of vinegar and they filled a
spunge with vinegar and put it upon hyssop and put it to his
mouth.
when Jesus therefore had received the vinegar he said it is
finished and he bowed his head and gave up the ghost.
the Jews therefore because it was the preparation that the
bodies should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day
 for that sabbath day was an high day besought Pilate that
their legs might be broken and that they might be taken away.
then came the soldiers and brake the legs of the first and
of the other which was crucified with him.
but when they came to Jesus and saw that he was dead already
they brake not his legs
but one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side and
forthwith came there out blood and water.
and he that saw it bare record and his record is true and he
knoweth that he saith true that ye might believe.
for these things were done that the scripture should be
fulfilled a bone of him shall not be broken.
and again another scripture saith they shall look on him whom
they pierced.
and after this Joseph of Arimathaea being a disciple of
Jesus but secretly for fear of the Jews besought Pilate that
he might take away the body of Jesus and Pilate gave him
leave. he came therefore and took the body of Jesus.
and there came also Nicodemus which at the first came to
Jesus by night and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes
about an hundred pound weight.
then took they the body of Jesus and wound it in linen
clothes with the spices as the manner of the Jews is to bury.
now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden
and in the garden a new sepulchre wherein was never man yet
laid.
there laid they Jesus therefore because of the Jews
preparation day for the sepulchre was nigh at hand.
the first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early when it
was yet dark unto the sepulchre and seeth the stone taken
away from the sepulchre.
then she runneth and cometh to Simon Peter and to the other
disciple whom Jesus loved and saith unto them they have
taken away the lord out of the sepulchre and we know not
where they have laid him.
Peter therefore went forth and that other disciple and came
to the sepulchre.
so they ran both together and the other disciple did outrun
Peter and came first to the sepulchre.
and he stooping down and looking in saw the linen clothes
lying yet went he not in.
then cometh Simon Peter following him and went into the
sepulchre and seeth the linen clothes lie
and the napkin that was about his head not lying with the
linen clothes but wrapped together in a place by itself.
then went in also that other disciple which came first to the
sepulchre and he saw and believed.
for as yet they knew not the scripture that he must rise
again from the dead.
then the disciples went away again unto their own home.
but Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping and as she
wept she stooped down and looked into the sepulchre
and seeth two angels in white sitting the one at the head
and the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had lain.
and they say unto her woman why weepest thou? she saith unto
them because they have taken away my lord and I know not
where they have laid him.
and when she had thus said she turned herself back and saw
Jesus standing and knew not that it was Jesus.
Jesus saith unto her woman why weepest thou? whom seekest
thou? she supposing him to be the gardener saith unto him
Sir if thou have borne him hence tell me where thou hast
laid him and I will take him away.
Jesus saith unto her Mary. she turned herself and saith unto
him Rabboni which is to say Master.
Jesus saith unto her touch me not for I Am not yet ascended
to my father but go to my brethren and say unto them I
ascend unto my father and your father and to my God and
your God.
Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen
the lord and that he had spoken these things unto her.
then the same day at evening being the first day of the week
when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled
for fear of the Jews came Jesus and stood in the midst and
saith unto them peace be unto you.
and when he had so said he shewed unto them his hands and his
side. then were the disciples glad when they saw the lord.
then said Jesus to them again peace be unto you as my father
hath sent me even so send I you.
and when he had said this he breathed on them and saith unto
them receive ye the holy ghost
whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them and
whose soever sins ye retain they are retained.
but Thomas one of the twelve called Didymus was not with
them when Jesus came.
the other disciples therefore said unto him we have seen the
lord. but he said unto them except I shall see in his hands
the print of the nails and put my finger into the print of
the nails and thrust my hand into his side I will not
believe.
and after eight days again his disciples were within and
Thomas with them then came Jesus the doors being shut and
stood in the midst and said peace be unto you.
then saith he to Thomas reach hither thy finger and behold
my hands and reach hither thy hand and thrust it into my
side and be not faithless but believing.
and Thomas answered and said unto him my lord and my God.
Jesus saith unto him Thomas because thou hast seen me thou
hast believed blessed are they that have not seen and yet
have believed.
and many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
disciples which are not written in this book
but these are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the
Christ the son of God and that believing ye might have life
through his name.
after these things Jesus shewed himself again to the disciples
at the sea of Tiberias and on this wise shewed he himself.
there were together Simon Peter and Thomas called Didymus
and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee and the sons of Zebedee and
two other of his disciples.
Simon Peter saith unto them I go a fishing. they say unto
him we also go with thee. they went forth and entered into a
ship Immediately and that night they caught nothing.
but when the morning was now come Jesus stood on the shore
but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.
then Jesus saith unto them children have ye any meat? they
answered him no.
and he said unto them cast the net on the right side of the
ship and ye shall find. they cast therefore and now they
were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes.
therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter it
is the lord. now when Simon Peter heard that it was the lord
he girt his fisher s coat unto him for he was naked and
did cast himself into the sea.
and the other disciples came in a little ship for they were
not far from land but as it were two hundred cubits
dragging the net with fishes.
as soon then as they were come to land they saw a fire of
coals there and fish laid thereon and bread.
Jesus saith unto them bring of the fish which ye have now
caught.
Simon Peter went up and drew the net to land full of great
fishes an hundred and fifty and three and for all there were
so many yet was not the net broken.
Jesus saith unto them come and dine. and none of the
disciples durst ask him who art thou? knowing that it was the
lord.
Jesus then cometh and taketh bread and giveth them and fish
likewise.
this is now the third time that Jesus shewed himself to his
disciples after that he was risen from the dead.
so when they had dined Jesus saith to Simon Peter Simon son
of Jonas lovest thou me more than these? he saith unto him
yea lord thou knowest that I love thee. he saith unto him
feed my lambs.
he saith to him again the second time Simon son of Jonas
lovest thou me? he saith unto him yea lord thou knowest
that I love thee. he saith unto him feed my sheep.
he saith unto him the third time Simon son of Jonas lovest
thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third
time lovest thou me? and he said unto him lord thou knowest
all things thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith unto
him feed my sheep.
verily verily I say unto thee when thou wast young thou
girdest thyself and walkedst whither thou wouldest but when
thou shalt be old thou shalt stretch forth thy hands and
another shall gird thee and carry thee whither thou wouldest
not.
this spake he signifying by what death he should glorify God.
and when he had spoken this he saith unto him follow me.
then Peter turning about seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved
following which also leaned on his breast at supper and
said lord which is he that betrayeth thee?
Peter seeing him saith to Jesus lord and what shall this man
do?
Jesus saith unto him if I will that he tarry till I come
what is that to thee? follow thou me.
then went this saying abroad among the brethren that that
disciple should not die yet Jesus said not unto him he shall
not die but if I will that he tarry till I come what is
that to thee?
this is the disciple which testifieth of these things and
wrote these things and we know that his testimony is true.
and there are also many other things which Jesus did the
which if they should be written every one I suppose that
even the world itself could not contain the books that should
be written. Amen.
the former treatise have I made O Theophilus of all that
Jesus began both to do and teach
until the day in which he was taken up after that he through
the holy ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom
he had chosen
to whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many
infallible proofs being seen of them forty days and speaking
of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God
and being assembled together with them commanded them that
they should not depart from Jerusalem but wait for the
promise of the father which saith he ye have heard of me.
for John truly baptized with water but ye shall be baptized
with the holy ghost not many days hence.
when they therefore were come together they asked of him
saying lord wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom
to Israel?
and he said unto them it is not for you to know the times or
the seasons which the father hath put in his own power.
but ye shall receive power after that the holy ghost is come
upon you and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem
and in all Judaea and in Samaria and unto the uttermost part
of the earth.
and when he had spoken these things while they beheld he was
taken up and a cloud received him out of their sight.
and while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up
behold two men stood by them in white apparel
which also said ye men of Galilee why stand ye gazing up
into heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up from you into
heaven shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go
into heaven.
then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called
Olivet which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day s journey.
and when they were come in they went up into an upper room
where abode both Peter and James and John and Andrew
Philip and Thomas Bartholomew and Matthew James the son of
Alphaeus and Simon Zelotes and Judas the brother of James.
these all continued with one accord in prayer and
supplication with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus
and with his brethren.
and in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the
disciples and said the number of names together were about
an hundred and twenty
men and brethren this scripture must needs have been
fulfilled which the holy ghost by the mouth of David spake
before concerning Judas which was guide to them that took
Jesus.
for he was numbered with us and had obtained part of this
ministry.
now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity
and falling headlong he burst asunder in the midst and all
his bowels gushed out.
and it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem insomuch
as that field is called in their proper tongue Aceldama that
is to say the field of blood.
for it is written in the book of psalms let his habitation be
desolate and let no man dwell therein and his bishoprick let
another take.
wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the
time that the lord Jesus went in and out among us
beginning from the baptism of John unto that same day that he
was taken up from us must one be ordained to be a witness
with us of his resurrection.
and they appointed two Joseph called Barsabas who was
surnamed Justus and Matthias.
and they prayed and said thou lord which knowest the
hearts of all men shew whether of these two thou hast chosen
that he may take part of this ministry and apostleship from
which Judas by transgression fell that he might go to his own
place.
and they gave forth their lots and the Lot fell upon
Matthias and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.
and when the day of Pentecost was fully come they were all
with one accord in one place.
and suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing
Mighty wind and it filled all the house where they were
sitting.
and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire
and it sat upon each of them.
and they were all filled with the holy ghost and began to
speak with other tongues as the spirit gave them utterance.
and there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews devout men out of
every nation under heaven.
now when this was noised abroad the multitude came together
and were confounded because that every man heard them speak
in his own language.
and they were all amazed and marvelled saying one to another
behold are not all these which speak Galilaeans?
and how hear we every man in our own tongue wherein we were
born?
Parthians and Medes and Elamites and the dwellers in
Mesopotamia and in Judaea and Cappadocia in Pontus and
Asia
Phrygia and Pamphylia in Egypt and in the parts of Libya
about Cyrene and strangers of Rome Jews and proselytes
Cretes and Arabians we do hear them speak in our tongues the
wonderful works of God.
and they were all amazed and were in doubt saying one to
another what meaneth this?
others mocking said these men are full of new wine.
but Peter standing up with the eleven lifted up his voice
and said unto them ye men of Judaea and all ye that dwell at
Jerusalem be this known unto you and hearken to my words
for these are not drunken as ye suppose seeing it is but the
third hour of the day.
but this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel
and it shall come to pass in the last days saith God I will
pour out of my spirit upon all flesh and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy and your young men shall see
visions and your old men shall dream dreams
and on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in
those days of my spirit and they shall prophesy
and I will shew wonders in heaven above and signs in the
earth beneath blood and fire and vapour of smoke
the sun shall be turned into darkness and the moon into
blood before the great and notable day of the lord come
and it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the
name of the lord shall be saved.
ye men of Israel hear these words Jesus of Nazareth a man
approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs
which God did by him in the midst of you as ye yourselves
also know
him being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God ye have taken and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain
whom God hath raised up having loosed the pains of death
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.
for David speaketh concerning him I foresaw the lord always
before my face for he is on my right hand that I should not
be moved
therefore did my heart rejoice and my tongue was glad
moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope
because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell Neither wilt thou
suffer thine holy one to see corruption.
thou hast made known to me the ways of life thou shalt make
me full of joy with thy countenance.
men and brethren let me freely speak unto you of the
patriarch David that he is both dead and buried and his
sepulchre is with us unto this day.
therefore being a prophet and knowing that God had sworn with
an oath to him that of the fruit of his loins according to
the flesh he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne
he seeing this before spake of the resurrection of Christ
that his soul was not left in hell Neither his flesh did see
corruption.
this Jesus hath God raised up whereof we all are witnesses.
therefore being by the right hand of God exalted and having
received of the father the promise of the holy ghost he hath
shed forth this which ye now see and hear.
for David is not ascended into the heavens but he saith
himself the lord said unto my lord sit thou on my right
hand
until I make thy foes thy footstool.
therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God
hath made the same Jesus whom ye have crucified both lord
and Christ.
now when they heard this they were pricked in their heart
and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles men and
brethren what shall we do?
then Peter said unto them repent and be baptized every one
of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins
and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.
for the promise is unto you and to your children and to all
that are afar off even as many as the lord our God shall
call.
and with many other words did he testify and exhort saying
save yourselves from this untoward generation.
then they that gladly received his word were baptized and the
same day there were added unto them about three thousand
souls.
and they continued stedfastly in the apostles doctrine and
fellowship and in breaking of bread and in prayers.
and fear came upon every soul and many wonders and signs were
done by the apostles.
and all that believed were together and had all things
common
and sold their possessions and goods and parted them to all
men as every man had need.
and they continuing daily with one accord in the temple and
breaking bread from house to house did eat their meat with
gladness and singleness of heart
praising God and having favour with all the people. and the
lord added to the church daily such as should be saved.
now Peter and John went up together into the temple at the
hour of prayer being the ninth hour.
and a certain man lame from his mother s womb was carried
whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called
beautiful to ask alms of them that entered into the temple
who seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple asked an
alms.
and Peter fastening his eyes upon him with John said look
on us.
and he gave heed unto them expecting to receive something of
them.
then Peter said Silver and gold have I none but such as I
have give I thee in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise
up and walk.
and he took him by the right hand and lifted him up and
Immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength.
and he leaping up stood and walked and entered with them
into the temple walking and leaping and praising God.
and all the people saw him walking and praising God
and they knew that it was he which sat for alms at the
beautiful gate of the temple and they were filled with wonder
and amazement at that which had happened unto him.
and as the lame man which was healed held Peter and John all
the people ran together unto them in the porch that is called
Solomon s greatly wondering.
and when Peter saw it he answered unto the people ye men of
Israel why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on
us as though by our own power or holiness we had made this
man to walk?
the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob the God of our
fathers hath glorified his son Jesus whom ye delivered up
and denied him in the presence of Pilate when he was
determined to let him go.
but ye denied the holy one and the just and desired a
murderer to be granted unto you
and killed the prince of life whom God hath raised from the
dead whereof we are witnesses.
and his name through faith in his name hath made this man
strong whom ye see and know yea the faith which is by him
hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you
all.
and now brethren I wot that through ignorance ye did it as
did also your rulers.
but those things which God before had shewed by the mouth of
all his prophets that Christ should suffer he hath so
fulfilled.
repent ye therefore and be converted that your sins may be
blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the lord.
and he shall send Jesus Christ which before was preached unto
you
whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of
all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy
prophets since the world began.
for Moses truly said unto the fathers a prophet shall the
lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto
me him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say
unto you.
and it shall come to pass that every soul which will not
hear that prophet shall be destroyed from among the people.
yea and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow
after as many as have spoken have likewise foretold of these
days.
ye are the children of the prophets and of the covenant which
God made with our fathers saying unto Abraham and in thy
seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.
unto you first God having raised up his son Jesus sent him
to bless you in turning away every one of you from his
iniquities.
and as they spake unto the people the priests and the
captain of the temple and the Sadducees came upon them
being grieved that they taught the people and preached
through Jesus the resurrection from the dead.
and they laid hands on them and put them in hold unto the
next day for it was now eventide.
howbeit many of them which heard the word believed and the
number of the men was about five thousand.
and it came to pass on the morrow that their rulers and
elders and scribes
and Annas the high priest and Caiaphas and John and
Alexander and as many as were of the kindred of the high
priest were gathered together at Jerusalem.
and when they had set them in the midst they asked by what
power or by what name have ye done this?
then Peter filled with the holy ghost said unto them ye
rulers of the people and elders of Israel
if we this day be examined of the good deed done to the
impotent man by what means he is made whole
be it known unto you all and to all the people of Israel
that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth whom ye
crucified whom God raised from the dead even by him doth
this man stand here before you whole.
this is the stone which was set at nought of you builders
which is become the head of the corner.
Neither is there salvation in any other for there is none
other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be
saved.
now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John and
perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men they
marvelled and they took knowledge of them that they had been
with Jesus.
and beholding the man which was healed standing with them
they could say nothing against it.
but when they had commanded them to go aside out of the
council they conferred among themselves
saying what shall we do to these men? for that indeed a
notable miracle hath been done by them is manifest to all them
that dwell in Jerusalem and we cannot deny it.
but that it spread no further among the people let us
straitly threaten them that they speak henceforth to no man
in this name.
and they called them and commanded them not to speak at all
nor teach in the name of Jesus.
but Peter and John answered and said unto them whether it be
right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto
God judge ye.
for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and
heard.
so when they had further threatened them they let them go
finding nothing how they might punish them because of the
people for all men glorified God for that which was done.
for the man was above forty years old on whom this miracle of
healing was shewed.
and being let go they went to their own company and reported
all that the chief priests and elders had said unto them.
and when they heard that they lifted up their voice to God
with one accord and said lord thou art God which hast made
heaven and earth and the sea and all that in them is
who by the mouth of thy servant David hast said why did the
heathen rage and the people imagine vain things?
the kings of the earth stood up and the rulers were gathered
together against the lord and against his Christ.
for of a truth against thy holy child Jesus whom thou hast
anointed both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles
and the people of Israel were gathered together
for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined
before to be done.
and now lord behold their threatenings and grant unto thy
servants that with all boldness they may speak thy word
by stretching forth thine hand to heal and that signs and
wonders may be done by the name of thy holy child Jesus.
and when they had prayed the place was shaken where they were
assembled together and they were all filled with the holy
ghost and they spake the word of God with boldness.
and the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and
of one soul Neither said any of them that ought of the things
which he possessed was his own but they had all things
common.
and with great power gave the apostles witness of the
resurrection of the lord Jesus and great grace was upon them
all.
Neither was there any among them that lacked for as many as
were possessors of lands or houses sold them and brought the
prices of the things that were sold
and laid them down at the apostles feet and distribution was
made unto every man according as he had need.
and Joses who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas which
is being interpreted the son of consolation a Levite and
of the country of Cyprus
having land sold it and brought the money and laid it at
the apostles feet.
but a certain man named Ananias with Sapphira his wife sold
a possession
and kept back part of the price his wife also being privy to
it and brought a certain part and laid it at the apostles
feet.
but Peter said Ananias why hath Satan filled thine heart to
lie to the holy ghost and to keep back part of the price of
the land?
whiles it remained was it not thine own? and after it was
sold was it not in thine own power? why hast thou conceived
this thing in thine heart? thou hast not lied unto men but
unto God.
and Ananias hearing these words fell down and gave up the
ghost and great fear came on all them that heard these
things.
and the young men arose wound him up and carried him out
and buried him.
and it was about the space of three hours after when his
wife not knowing what was done came in.
and Peter answered unto her tell me whether ye sold the land
for so Much? and she said yea for so Much.
then Peter said unto her how is it that ye have agreed
together to tempt the spirit of the lord? behold the feet of
them which have buried thy husband are at the door and shall
carry thee out.
then fell she down straightway at his feet and yielded up the
ghost and the young men came in and found her dead and
carrying her forth buried her by her husband.
and great fear came upon all the church and upon as many as
heard these things.
and by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders
wrought among the people and they were all with one accord
in Solomon s porch.
and of the rest durst no man join himself to them but the
people magnified them.
and believers were the more added to the lord multitudes both
of men and women.
insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets
and laid them on beds and couches that at the least the
shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them.
there came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto
Jerusalem bringing sick folks and them which were vexed with
unclean spirits and they were healed every one.
then the high priest rose up and all they that were with him
 which is the sect of the Sadducees and were filled with
indignation
and laid their hands on the apostles and put them in the
common prison.
but the angel of the lord by night opened the prison doors
and brought them forth and said
go stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words
of this life.
and when they heard that they entered into the temple early
in the morning and taught. but the high priest came and they
that were with him and called the council together and all
the senate of the children of Israel and sent to the prison
to have them brought.
but when the officers came and found them not in the prison
they returned and told
saying the prison truly found we shut with all safety and
the keepers standing without before the doors but when we had
opened we found no man within.
now when the high priest and the captain of the temple and the
chief priests heard these things they doubted of them
whereunto this would grow.
then came one and told them saying behold the men whom ye
put in prison are standing in the temple and teaching the
people.
then went the captain with the officers and brought them
without violence for they feared the people lest they should
have been stoned.
and when they had brought them they set them before the
council and the high priest asked them
saying did not we straitly command you that ye should not
teach in this name? and behold ye have filled Jerusalem with
your doctrine and intend to bring this man s blood upon us.
then Peter and the other apostles answered and said we ought
to obey God rather than men.
the God of our fathers raised up Jesus whom ye slew and
hanged on a tree.
him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a prince and a
saviour for to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of
sins.
and we are his witnesses of these things and so is also the
holy ghost whom God hath given to them that obey him.
when they heard that they were cut to the heart and took
counsel to slay them.
then stood there up one in the council a Pharisee named
Gamaliel a doctor of the law had in reputation among all the
people and commanded to put the apostles forth a little
space
and said unto them ye men of Israel take heed to yourselves
what ye intend to do as touching these men.
for before these days rose up Theudas boasting himself to be
somebody to whom a number of men about four hundred joined
themselves who was slain and all as many as obeyed him
were scattered and brought to nought.
after this man rose up Judas of Galilee in the days of the
taxing and drew away Much people after him he also perished
and all even as many as obeyed him were dispersed.
and now I say unto you refrain from these men and let them
alone for if this counsel or this work be of men it will
come to nought
but if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it lest haply ye be
found even to fight against God.
and to him they agreed and when they had called the apostles
and beaten them they commanded that they should not speak in
the name of Jesus and let them go.
and they departed from the presence of the council rejoicing
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.
and daily in the temple and in every house they ceased not
to teach and preach Jesus Christ.
and in those days when the number of the disciples was
multiplied there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against
the Hebrews because their widows were neglected in the daily
ministration.
then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto
them and said it is not reason that we should leave the word
of God and serve tables.
wherefore brethren look ye out among you seven men of honest
report full of the holy ghost and wisdom whom we may appoint
over this business.
but we will give ourselves continually to prayer and to the
ministry of the word.
and the saying pleased the whole multitude and they chose
Stephen a man full of faith and of the holy ghost and
Philip and Prochorus and Nicanor and Timon and Parmenas
and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch
whom they set before the apostles and when they had prayed
they laid their hands on them.
and the word of God increased and the number of the disciples
multiplied in Jerusalem greatly and a great company of the
priests were obedient to the faith.
and Stephen full of faith and power did great wonders and
miracles among the people.
then there arose certain of the synagogue which is called the
synagogue of the Libertines and Cyrenians and Alexandrians
and of them of Cilicia and of Asia disputing with Stephen.
and they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by
which he spake.
then they suborned men which said we have heard him speak
blasphemous words against Moses and against God.
and they stirred up the people and the elders and the
scribes and came upon him and caught him and brought him to
the council
and set up false witnesses which said this man ceaseth not
to speak blasphemous words against this holy place and the
law
for we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth shall
destroy this place and shall change the customs which Moses
delivered us.
and all that sat in the council looking stedfastly on him
saw his face as it had been the face of an angel.
then said the high priest are these things so?
and he said men brethren and fathers hearken the God of
glory appeared unto our father Abraham when he was in
Mesopotamia before he dwelt in Charran
and said unto him get thee out of thy country and from thy
kindred and come into the land which I shall shew thee.
then came he out of the land of the Chaldaeans and dwelt in
Charran and from thence when his father was dead he removed
him into this land wherein ye now dwell.
and he gave him none inheritance in it no not so Much as to
set his foot on yet he promised that he would give it to him
for a possession and to his seed after him when as yet he
had no child.
and God spake on this wise that his seed should Sojourn in a
strange land and that they should bring them into bondage
and entreat them evil four hundred years.
and the nation to whom they shall be in bondage will I judge
said God and after that shall they come forth and serve me
in this place.
and he gave him the covenant of circumcision and so Abraham
begat Isaac and circumcised him the eighth day and Isaac
begat Jacob and Jacob begat the twelve patriarchs.
and the patriarchs moved with envy sold Joseph into Egypt
but God was with him
and delivered him out of all his afflictions and gave him
favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt and
he made him Governor over Egypt and all his house.
now there came a dearth over all the land of Egypt and
Chanaan and great affliction and our fathers found no
sustenance.
but when Jacob heard that there was corn in Egypt he sent out
our fathers first.
and at the second time Joseph was made known to his brethren
and Joseph s kindred was made known unto Pharaoh.
then sent Joseph and called his father Jacob to him and all
his kindred threescore and fifteen souls.
so Jacob went down into Egypt and died he and our fathers
and were carried over into Sychem and laid in the sepulchre
that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emmor
the father of Sychem.
but when the time of the promise drew nigh which God had
sworn to Abraham the people grew and multiplied in Egypt
till another king arose which knew not Joseph.
the same dealt subtilly with our kindred and evil entreated
our fathers so that they cast out their young children to
the end they might not live.
in which time Moses was born and was exceeding fair and
nourished up in his father s house three months
and when he was cast out Pharaoh s daughter took him up and
nourished him for her own son.
and Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians and
was Mighty in words and in deeds.
and when he was full forty years old it came into his heart
to visit his brethren the children of Israel.
and seeing one of them suffer wrong he defended him and
avenged him that was oppressed and smote the Egyptian
for he supposed his brethren would have understood how that
God by his hand would deliver them but they understood not.
and the next day he shewed himself unto them as they strove
and would have set them at one again saying sirs ye are
brethren why do ye wrong one to another?
but he that did his neighbour wrong thrust him away saying
who made thee a ruler and a judge over us?
wilt thou kill me as thou diddest the Egyptian yesterday?
then fled Moses at this saying and was a stranger in the land
of Madian where he begat two sons.
and when forty years were expired there appeared to him in
the wilderness of mount Sina an angel of the lord in a flame
of fire in a bush.
when Moses saw it he wondered at the sight and as he drew
near to behold it the voice of the lord came unto him
saying I Am the God of thy fathers the God of Abraham and
the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. then Moses trembled
and durst not behold.
then said the lord to him put off thy shoes from thy feet
for the place where thou standest is holy ground.
I have seen I have seen the affliction of my people which is
in Egypt and I have heard their groaning and Am come down to
deliver them. and now come I will send thee into Egypt.
this Moses whom they refused saying who made thee a ruler
and a judge? the same did God send to be a ruler and a
deliverer by the hand of the angel which appeared to him in
the bush.
he brought them out after that he had shewed wonders and
signs in the land of Egypt and in the red sea and in the
wilderness forty years.
this is that Moses which said unto the children of Israel a
prophet shall the lord your God raise up unto you of your
brethren like unto me him shall ye hear.
this is he that was in the church in the wilderness with the
angel which spake to him in the mount Sina and with our
fathers who received the lively oracles to give unto us
to whom our fathers would not obey but thrust him from them
and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt
saying unto Aaron make us gods to go before us for as for
this Moses which brought us out of the land of Egypt we wot
not what is become of him.
and they made a calf in those days and offered sacrifice unto
the idol and rejoiced in the works of their own hands.
then God turned and gave them up to worship the host of
heaven as it is written in the book of the prophets O ye
house of Israel have ye offered to me slain beasts and
sacrifices by the space of forty years in the wilderness?
yea ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch and the star of your
God Remphan figures which ye made to worship them and I will
carry you away beyond Babylon.
our fathers had the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness
as he had appointed speaking unto Moses that he should make
it according to the fashion that he had seen.
which also our fathers that came after brought in with Jesus
into the possession of the Gentiles whom God drave out before
the face of our fathers unto the days of David
who found favour before God and desired to find a tabernacle
for the God of Jacob.
but Solomon built him an house.
howbeit the most high dwelleth not in temples made with hands
as saith the prophet
heaven is my throne and earth is my footstool what house
will ye build me? saith the lord or what is the place of my
rest?
hath not my hand made all these things?
ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears ye do
always resist the holy ghost as your fathers did so do ye.
which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and
they have slain them which shewed before of the coming of the
just one of whom ye have been now the betrayers and
murderers
who have received the law by the disposition of angels and
have not kept it.
when they heard these things they were cut to the heart and
they gnashed on him with their teeth.
but he being full of the holy ghost looked up stedfastly
into heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing on
the right hand of God
and said behold I see the heavens opened and the son of man
standing on the right hand of God.
then they cried out with a loud voice and stopped their ears
and ran upon him with one accord
and cast him out of the city and stoned him and the
witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man s feet whose
name was Saul.
and they stoned Stephen calling upon God and saying lord
Jesus receive my spirit.
and he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice lord lay
not this Sin to their charge. and when he had said this he
fell asleep.
and Saul was consenting unto his death. and at that time there
was a great persecution against the church which was at
Jerusalem and they were all scattered abroad throughout the
regions of Judaea and Samaria except the apostles.
and devout men carried Stephen to his burial and made great
lamentation over him.
as for Saul he made havock of the church entering into every
house and haling men and women committed them to prison.
therefore they that were scattered abroad went every where
preaching the word.
then Philip went down to the city of Samaria and preached
Christ unto them.
and the people with one accord gave heed unto those things
which Philip spake hearing and seeing the miracles which he
did.
for unclean spirits crying with loud voice came out of many
that were possessed with them and many taken with palsies
and that were lame were healed.
and there was great joy in that city.
but there was a certain man called Simon which beforetime in
the same city used sorcery and bewitched the people of
Samaria giving out that himself was some great one
to whom they all gave heed from the least to the greatest
saying this man is the great power of God.
and to him they had regard because that of long time he had
bewitched them with sorceries.
but when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning
the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ they were
baptized both men and women.
then Simon himself believed also and when he was baptized he
continued with Philip and wondered beholding the miracles
and signs which were done.
now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that
Samaria had received the word of God they sent unto them
Peter and John
who when they were come down prayed for them that they
might receive the holy ghost
 for as yet he was fallen upon none of them only they were
baptized in the name of the lord Jesus.
then laid they their hands on them and they received the holy
ghost.
and when Simon saw that through laying on of the apostles
hands the holy ghost was given he offered them money
saying give me also this power that on whomsoever I lay
hands he may receive the holy ghost.
but Peter said unto him thy money perish with thee because
thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with
money.
thou hast Neither part nor Lot in this matter for thy heart
is not right in the sight of God.
repent therefore of this thy wickedness and pray God if
perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.
for I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness and in
the bond of iniquity.
then answered Simon and said pray ye to the lord for me
that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me.
and they when they had testified and preached the word of the
lord returned to Jerusalem and preached the gospel in many
villages of the Samaritans.
and the angel of the lord spake unto Philip saying Arise
and go toward the south unto the way that goeth down from
Jerusalem unto Gaza which is desert.
and he arose and went and behold a man of Ethiopia an
eunuch of great authority under Candace queen of the
Ethiopians who had the charge of all her treasure and had
come to Jerusalem for to worship
was returning and sitting in his chariot read Esaias the
prophet.
then the spirit said unto Philip go near and join thyself to
this chariot.
and Philip ran thither to him and heard him read the prophet
Esaias and said understandest thou what thou readest?
and he said how can I except some man should guide me? and
he desired Philip that he would come up and sit with him.
the place of the scripture which he read was this he was led
as a sheep to the slaughter and like a lamb dumb before his
shearer so opened he not his mouth
in his humiliation his judgment was taken away and who shall
declare his generation? for his life is taken from the earth.
and the eunuch answered Philip and said I pray thee of whom
speaketh the prophet this? of himself or of some other man?
then Philip opened his mouth and began at the same scripture
and preached unto him Jesus.
and as they went on their way they came unto a certain water
and the eunuch said see here is water what doth hinder me
to be baptized?
and Philip said if thou believest with all thine heart thou
mayest. and he answered and said I believe that Jesus Christ
is the son of God.
and he commanded the chariot to stand still and they went
down both into the water both Philip and the eunuch and he
baptized him.
and when they were come up out of the water the spirit of the
lord caught away Philip that the eunuch saw him no more and
he went on his way rejoicing.
but Philip was found at Azotus and passing through he
preached in all the cities till he came to Caesarea.
and Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against
the disciples of the lord went unto the high priest
and desired of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues that
if he found any of this way whether they were men or women
he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem.
and as he journeyed he came near Damascus and suddenly there
shined round about him a light from heaven
and he fell to the earth and heard a voice saying unto him
Saul Saul why persecutest thou me?
and he said who art thou lord? and the lord said I Am Jesus
whom thou persecutest it is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks.
and he trembling and astonished said lord what wilt thou
have me to do? and the lord said unto him Arise and go into
the city and it shall be told thee what thou must do.
and the men which journeyed with him stood speechless hearing
a voice but seeing no man.
and Saul arose from the earth and when his eyes were opened
he saw no man but they led him by the hand and brought him
into Damascus.
and he was three days without sight and Neither did eat nor
drink.
and there was a certain disciple at Damascus named Ananias
and to him said the lord in a vision Ananias. and he said
behold I Am here lord.
and the lord said unto him Arise and go into the street
which is called straight and enquire in the house of Judas
for one called Saul of Tarsus for behold he prayeth
and hath seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming in and
putting his hand on him that he might receive his sight.
then Ananias answered lord I have heard by many of this man
how Much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem
and here he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all
that call on thy name.
but the lord said unto him go thy way for he is a chosen
vessel unto me to bear my name before the Gentiles and
kings and the children of Israel
for I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my
name s sake.
and Ananias went his way and entered into the house and
putting his hands on him said brother Saul the lord even
Jesus that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest hath
sent me that thou mightest receive thy sight and be filled
with the holy ghost.
and Immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been
scales and he received sight forthwith and arose and was
baptized.
and when he had received meat he was strengthened. then was
Saul certain days with the disciples which were at Damascus.
and straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues that he
is the son of God.
but all that heard him were amazed and said is not this he
that destroyed them which called on this name in Jerusalem
and came hither for that intent that he might bring them
bound unto the chief priests?
but Saul increased the more in strength and confounded the
Jews which dwelt at Damascus proving that this is very
Christ.
and after that many days were fulfilled the Jews took counsel
to kill him
but their laying await was known of Saul. and they watched the
gates day and night to kill him.
then the disciples took him by night and let him down by the
wall in a basket.
and when Saul was come to Jerusalem he assayed to join
himself to the disciples but they were all afraid of him and
believed not that he was a disciple.
but Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles and
declared unto them how he had seen the lord in the way and
that he had spoken to him and how he had preached boldly at
Damascus in the name of Jesus.
and he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem.
and he spake boldly in the name of the lord Jesus and
disputed against the Grecians but they went about to slay
him.
which when the brethren knew they brought him down to
Caesarea and sent him forth to Tarsus.
then had the churches rest throughout all Judaea and Galilee
and Samaria and were edified and walking in the fear of the
lord and in the comfort of the holy ghost were multiplied.
and it came to pass as Peter passed throughout all quarters
he came down also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda.
and there he found a certain man named Aeneas which had kept
his bed eight years and was sick of the palsy.
and Peter said unto him Aeneas Jesus Christ maketh thee
whole Arise and make thy bed. and he arose Immediately.
and all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw him and turned to
the lord.
now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha which
by interpretation is called Dorcas this woman was full of
good works and almsdeeds which she did.
and it came to pass in those days that she was sick and
died whom when they had washed they laid her in an upper
chamber.
and forasmuch as Lydda was nigh to Joppa and the disciples
had heard that Peter was there they sent unto him two men
desiring him that he would not delay to come to them.
then Peter arose and went with them. when he was come they
brought him into the upper chamber and all the widows stood
by him weeping and shewing the coats and garments which
Dorcas made while she was with them.
but Peter put them all forth and kneeled down and prayed
and turning him to the body said Tabitha Arise. and she
opened her eyes and when she saw Peter she sat up.
and he gave her his hand and lifted her up and when he had
called the saints and widows presented her alive.
and it was known throughout all Joppa and many believed in
the lord.
and it came to pass that he tarried many days in Joppa with
one Simon a tanner.
there was a certain man in Caesarea called Cornelius a
centurion of the band called the Italian band
a devout man and one that feared God with all his house
which gave Much alms to the people and prayed to God alway.
he saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day
an angel of God coming in to him and saying unto him
Cornelius.
and when he looked on him he was afraid and said what is
it lord? and he said unto him thy prayers and thine alms are
come up for a memorial before God.
and now send men to Joppa and call for one Simon whose
surname is Peter
he lodgeth with one Simon a tanner whose house is by the sea
side he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do.
and when the angel which spake unto Cornelius was departed he
called two of his household servants and a devout soldier of
them that waited on him continually
and when he had declared all these things unto them he sent
them to Joppa.
on the morrow as they went on their journey and drew nigh
unto the city Peter went up upon the housetop to pray about
the sixth hour
and he became very hungry and would have eaten but while
they made ready he fell into a trance
and saw heaven opened and a certain vessel descending upon
him as it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners
and let down to the earth
wherein were all manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth and
wild beasts and creeping things and fowls of the air.
and there came a voice to him rise Peter kill and eat.
but Peter said not so lord for I have never eaten any thing
that is common or unclean.
and the voice spake unto him again the second time what God
hath cleansed that call not thou common.
this was done thrice and the vessel was received up again
into heaven.
now while Peter doubted in himself what this vision which he
had seen should mean behold the men which were sent from
Cornelius had made enquiry for Simon s house and stood before
the gate
and called and asked whether Simon which was surnamed Peter
were lodged there.
while Peter thought on the vision the spirit said unto him
behold three men seek thee.
Arise therefore and get thee down and go with them doubting
nothing for I have sent them.
then Peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from
Cornelius and said behold I Am he whom ye seek what is the
cause wherefore ye are come?
and they said Cornelius the centurion a just man and one
that feareth God and of good report among all the nation of
the Jews was warned from God by an holy angel to send for
thee into his house and to hear words of thee.
then called he them in and lodged them. and on the morrow
Peter went away with them and certain brethren from Joppa
accompanied him.
and the morrow after they entered into Caesarea. and Cornelius
waited for them and he had called together his kinsmen and
near friends.
and as Peter was coming in Cornelius met him and fell down
at his feet and worshipped him.
but Peter took him up saying stand up I myself also Am a
man.
and as he talked with him he went in and found many that
were come together.
and he said unto them ye know how that it is an unlawful
thing for a man that is a Jew to keep company or come unto
one of another nation but God hath shewed me that I should
not call any man common or unclean.
therefore came I unto you without gainsaying as soon as I was
sent for I ask therefore for what intent ye have sent for me?
and Cornelius said four days ago I was fasting until this
hour and at the ninth hour I prayed in my house and behold
a man stood before me in bright clothing
and said Cornelius thy prayer is heard and thine alms are
had in remembrance in the sight of God.
send therefore to Joppa and call hither Simon whose surname
is Peter he is lodged in the house of one Simon a tanner by
the sea side who when he cometh shall speak unto thee.
Immediately therefore I sent to thee and thou hast well done
that thou art come. now therefore are we all here present
before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.
then Peter opened his mouth and said of a truth I perceive
that God is no respecter of persons
but in every nation he that feareth him and worketh
righteousness is accepted with him.
the word which God sent unto the children of Israel preaching
peace by Jesus Christ he is lord of all
that word I say ye know which was published throughout all
Judaea and began from Galilee after the baptism which John
preached
how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy ghost and
with power who went about doing good and healing all that
were oppressed of the devil for God was with him.
and we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the
land of the Jews and in Jerusalem whom they slew and hanged
on a tree
him God raised up the third day and shewed him openly
not to all the people but unto witnesses chosen before God
even to us who did eat and drink with him after he rose from
the dead.
and he commanded us to preach unto the people and to testify
that it is he which was ordained of God to be the judge of
quick and dead.
to him give all the prophets witness that through his name
whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins.
while Peter yet spake these words the holy ghost fell on all
them which heard the word.
and they of the circumcision which believed were astonished
as many as came with Peter because that on the Gentiles also
was poured out the gift of the holy ghost.
for they heard them speak with tongues and magnify God. then
answered Peter
can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized
which have received the holy ghost as well as we?
and he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the lord.
then prayed they him to tarry certain days.
and the apostles and brethren that were in Judaea heard that
the Gentiles had also received the word of God.
and when Peter was come up to Jerusalem they that were of the
circumcision contended with him
saying thou wentest in to men uncircumcised and didst eat
with them.
but Peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning and
expounded it by order unto them saying
I was in the city of Joppa praying and in a trance I saw a
vision a certain vessel descend as it had been a great
sheet let down from heaven by four corners and it came even
to me
upon the which when I had fastened mine eyes I considered
and saw fourfooted beasts of the earth and wild beasts and
creeping things and fowls of the air.
and I heard a voice saying unto me Arise Peter slay and
eat.
but I said not so lord for nothing common or unclean hath
at any time entered into my mouth.
but the voice answered me again from heaven what God hath
cleansed that call not thou common.
and this was done three times and all were drawn up again
into heaven.
and behold Immediately there were three men already come
unto the house where I was sent from Caesarea unto me.
and the spirit bade me go with them nothing doubting.
moreover these six brethren accompanied me and we entered
into the man s house
and he shewed us how he had seen an angel in his house which
stood and said unto him send men to Joppa and call for
Simon whose surname is Peter
who shall tell thee words whereby thou and all thy house
shall be saved.
and as I began to speak the holy ghost fell on them as on us
at the beginning.
then remembered I the word of the lord how that he said John
indeed baptized with water but ye shall be baptized with the
holy ghost.
forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift as he did unto
us who believed on the lord Jesus Christ what was I that I
could withstand God?
when they heard these things they held their peace and
glorified God saying then hath God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life.
now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that
arose about Stephen travelled as far as Phenice and Cyprus
and Antioch preaching the word to none but unto the Jews
only.
and some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene which when
they were come to Antioch spake unto the Grecians preaching
the lord Jesus.
and the hand of the lord was with them and a great number
believed and turned unto the lord.
then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the church
which was in Jerusalem and they sent forth Barnabas that he
should go as far as Antioch.
who when he came and had seen the grace of God was glad
and exhorted them all that with purpose of heart they would
cleave unto the lord.
for he was a good man and full of the holy ghost and of
faith and Much people was added unto the lord.
then departed Barnabas to Tarsus for to seek Saul
and when he had found him he brought him unto Antioch. and it
came to pass that a whole year they assembled themselves with
the church and taught Much people. and the disciples were
called Christians first in Antioch.
and in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch.
and there stood up one of them named Agabus and signified by
the spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all
the world which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar.
then the disciples every man according to his ability
determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in
Judaea
which also they did and sent it to the elders by the hands of
Barnabas and Saul.
now about that time Herod the king stretched forth his hands
to vex certain of the church.
and he killed James the brother of John with the sword.
and because he saw it pleased the Jews he proceeded further
to take Peter also. then were the days of unleavened bread.
and when he had apprehended him he put him in prison and
delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him
intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people.
Peter therefore was kept in prison but prayer was made
without ceasing of the church unto God for him.
and when Herod would have brought him forth the same night
Peter was sleeping between two soldiers bound with two
chains and the keepers before the door kept the prison.
and behold the angel of the lord came upon him and a light
shined in the prison and he smote Peter on the side and
raised him up saying Arise up quickly. and his chains fell
off from his hands.
and the angel said unto him gird thyself and bind on thy
sandals. and so he did. and he saith unto him cast thy
garment about thee and follow me.
and he went out and followed him and wist not that it was
true which was done by the angel but thought he saw a vision.
when they were past the first and the second ward they came
unto the Iron gate that leadeth unto the city which opened to
them of his own accord and they went out and passed on
through one street and forthwith the angel departed from him.
and when Peter was come to himself he said now I know of a
surety that the lord hath sent his angel and hath delivered
me out of the hand of Herod and from all the expectation of
the people of the Jews.
and when he had considered the thing he came to the house of
Mary the mother of John whose surname was Mark where many
were gathered together praying.
and as Peter knocked at the door of the gate a damsel came to
hearken named Rhoda.
and when she knew Peter s voice she opened not the gate for
gladness but ran in and told how Peter stood before the
gate.
and they said unto her thou art mad. but she constantly
affirmed that it was even so. then said they it is his angel.
but Peter continued knocking and when they had opened the
door and saw him they were astonished.
but he beckoning unto them with the hand to hold their peace
declared unto them how the lord had brought him out of the
prison. and he said go shew these things unto James and to
the brethren. and he departed and went into another place.
now as soon as it was day there was no small stir among the
soldiers what was become of Peter.
and when Herod had sought for him and found him not he
examined the keepers and commanded that they should be put to
death. and he went down from Judaea to Caesarea and there
abode.
and Herod was highly displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon
but they came with one accord to him and having made Blastus
the king s chamberlain their friend desired peace because
their country was nourished by the king s country.
and upon a set day Herod arrayed in royal apparel sat upon
his throne and made an oration unto them.
and the people gave a shout saying it is the voice of a God
and not of a man.
and Immediately the angel of the lord smote him because he
gave not God the glory and he was eaten of worms and gave up
the ghost.
but the word of God grew and multiplied.
and Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem when they had
fulfilled their ministry and took with them John whose
surname was Mark.
now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain
prophets and teachers as Barnabas and Simeon that was called
Niger and Lucius of Cyrene and Manaen which had been
brought up with Herod the tetrarch and Saul.
as they ministered to the lord and fasted the holy ghost
said separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I
have called them.
and when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on
them they sent them away.
so they being sent forth by the holy ghost departed unto
Seleucia and from thence they sailed to Cyprus.
and when they were at Salamis they preached the word of God
in the synagogues of the Jews and they had also John to their
minister.
and when they had gone through the isle unto Paphos they
found a certain sorcerer a false prophet a Jew whose name
was Barjesus
which was with the deputy of the country Sergius Paulus a
prudent man who called for Barnabas and Saul and desired to
hear the word of God.
but Elymas the sorcerer for so is his name by interpretation
withstood them seeking to turn away the deputy from the
faith.
then Saul who also is called Paul filled with the holy
ghost set his eyes on him.
and said O full of all subtilty and all mischief thou child
of the devil thou enemy of all righteousness wilt thou not
cease to pervert the right ways of the lord?
and now behold the hand of the lord is upon thee and thou
shalt be blind not seeing the sun for a season. and
Immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness and he
went about seeking some to lead him by the hand.
then the deputy when he saw what was done believed being
astonished at the doctrine of the lord.
now when Paul and his company loosed from Paphos they came to
Perga in Pamphylia and John departing from them returned to
Jerusalem.
but when they departed from Perga they came to Antioch in
Pisidia and went into the synagogue on the sabbath day and
sat down.
and after the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers
of the synagogue sent unto them saying ye men and brethren
if ye have any word of exhortation for the people say on.
then Paul stood up and beckoning with his hand said men of
Israel and ye that fear God give audience.
the God of this people of Israel chose our fathers and
exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of
Egypt and with an high arm brought he them out of it.
and about the time of forty years suffered he their manners in
the wilderness.
and when he had destroyed seven nations in the land of
Chanaan he divided their land to them by Lot.
and after that he gave unto them judges about the space of
four hundred and fifty years until Samuel the prophet.
and afterward they desired a king and God gave unto them Saul
the son of Cis a man of the tribe of Benjamin by the space
of forty years.
and when he had removed him he raised up unto them David to
be their king to whom also he gave their testimony and said
I have found David the son of Jesse a man after mine own
heart which shall fulfil all my will.
of this man s seed hath God according to his promise raised
unto Israel a saviour Jesus
when John had first preached before his coming the baptism of
repentance to all the people of Israel.
and as John fulfilled his course he said whom think ye that
I Am? I Am not he. but behold there cometh one after me
whose shoes of his feet I Am not worthy to loose.
men and brethren children of the stock of Abraham and
whosoever among you feareth God to you is the word of this
salvation sent.
for they that dwell at Jerusalem and their rulers because
they knew him not nor yet the voices of the prophets which
are read every sabbath day they have fulfilled them in
condemning him.
and though they found no cause of death in him yet desired
they Pilate that he should be slain.
and when they had fulfilled all that was written of him they
took him down from the tree and laid him in a sepulchre.
but God raised him from the dead
and he was seen many days of them which came up with him from
Galilee to Jerusalem who are his witnesses unto the people.
and we declare unto you glad tidings how that the promise
which was made unto the fathers
God hath fulfilled the same unto us their children in that he
hath raised up Jesus again as it is also written in the
second psalm thou art my son this day have I begotten thee.
and as concerning that he raised him up from the dead now no
more to return to corruption he said on this wise I will
give you the sure mercies of David.
wherefore he saith also in another psalm thou shalt not
suffer thine holy one to see corruption.
for David after he had served his own generation by the will
of God fell on sleep and was laid unto his fathers and saw
corruption
but he whom God raised again saw no corruption.
be it known unto you therefore men and brethren that through
this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins
and by him all that believe are justified from all things
from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses.
beware therefore lest that come upon you which is spoken of
in the prophets
behold ye despisers and wonder and perish for I work a
work in your days a work which ye shall in no wise believe
though a man declare it unto you.
and when the Jews were gone out of the synagogue the Gentiles
besought that these words might be preached to them the next
sabbath.
now when the congregation was broken up many of the Jews and
religious proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas who speaking
to them persuaded them to continue in the grace of God.
and the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together
to hear the word of God.
but when the Jews saw the multitudes they were filled with
envy and spake against those things which were spoken by
Paul contradicting and blaspheming.
then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold and said it was necessary
that the word of God should first have been spoken to you but
seeing ye put it from you and judge yourselves unworthy of
everlasting life lo we turn to the Gentiles.
for so hath the lord commanded us saying I have set thee to
be a light of the Gentiles that thou shouldest be for
salvation unto the ends of the earth.
and when the Gentiles heard this they were glad and
glorified the word of the lord and as many as were ordained
to eternal life believed.
and the word of the lord was published throughout all the
region.
but the Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women and
the chief men of the city and raised persecution against Paul
and Barnabas and expelled them out of their coasts.
but they shook off the dust of their feet against them and
came unto Iconium.
and the disciples were filled with joy and with the holy
ghost.
and it came to pass in Iconium that they went both together
into the synagogue of the Jews and so spake that a great
multitude both of the Jews and also of the Greeks believed.
but the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles and made
their minds evil affected against the brethren.
long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the lord
which gave testimony unto the word of his grace and granted
signs and wonders to be done by their hands.
but the multitude of the city was divided and part held with
the Jews and part with the apostles.
and when there was an assault made both of the Gentiles and
also of the Jews with their rulers to use them despitefully
and to stone them
they were ware of it and fled unto Lystra and Derbe cities
of Lycaonia and unto the region that lieth round about
and there they preached the gospel.
and there sat a certain man at Lystra impotent in his feet
being a cripple from his mother s womb who never had walked
the same heard Paul speak who stedfastly beholding him and
perceiving that he had faith to be healed
said with a loud voice stand upright on thy feet. and he
leaped and walked.
and when the people saw what Paul had done they lifted up
their voices saying in the speech of Lycaonia the gods are
come down to us in the likeness of men.
and they called Barnabas Jupiter and Paul Mercurius
because he was the chief speaker.
then the priest of Jupiter which was before their city
brought oxen and garlands unto the gates and would have done
sacrifice with the people.
which when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of they
rent their clothes and ran in among the people crying out
and saying sirs why do ye these things? we also are men of
like passions with you and preach unto you that ye should
turn from these vanities unto the living God which made
heaven and earth and the sea and all things that are
therein
who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own
ways.
nevertheless he left not himself without witness in that he
did good and gave us rain from heaven and fruitful seasons
filling our hearts with food and gladness.
and with these sayings scarce restrained they the people that
they had not done sacrifice unto them.
and there came thither certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium
who persuaded the people and having stoned Paul drew him out
of the city supposing he had been dead.
howbeit as the disciples stood round about him he rose up
and came into the city and the next day he departed with
Barnabas to Derbe.
and when they had preached the gospel to that city and had
taught many they returned again to Lystra and to Iconium
and Antioch
confirming the souls of the disciples and exhorting them to
continue in the faith and that we must through Much
tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.
and when they had ordained them elders in every church and
had prayed with fasting they commended them to the lord on
whom they believed.
and after they had passed throughout Pisidia they came to
Pamphylia.
and when they had preached the word in Perga they went down
into Attalia
and thence sailed to Antioch from whence they had been
recommended to the grace of God for the work which they
fulfilled.
and when they were come and had gathered the church together
they rehearsed all that God had done with them and how he had
opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles.
and there they abode long time with the disciples.
and certain men which came down from Judaea taught the
brethren and said except ye be circumcised after the manner
of Moses ye cannot be saved.
when therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and
disputation with them they determined that Paul and Barnabas
and certain other of them should go up to Jerusalem unto the
apostles and elders about this question.
and being brought on their way by the church they passed
through Phenice and Samaria declaring the conversion of the
Gentiles and they caused great joy unto all the brethren.
and when they were come to Jerusalem they were received of
the church and of the apostles and elders and they declared
all things that God had done with them.
but there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which
believed saying that it was needful to circumcise them and
to command them to keep the law of Moses.
and the apostles and elders came together for to consider of
this matter.
and when there had been Much disputing Peter rose up and
said unto them men and brethren ye know how that a good
while ago God made choice among us that the Gentiles by my
mouth should hear the word of the gospel and believe.
and God which knoweth the hearts bare them witness giving
them the holy ghost even as he did unto us
and put no difference between us and them purifying their
hearts by faith.
now therefore why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of
the disciples which Neither our fathers nor we were able to
bear?
but we believe that through the grace of the lord Jesus Christ
we shall be saved even as they.
then all the multitude kept silence and gave audience to
Barnabas and Paul declaring what miracles and wonders God had
wrought among the Gentiles by them.
and after they had held their peace James answered saying
men and brethren hearken unto me
Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the
Gentiles to take out of them a people for his name.
and to this agree the words of the prophets as it is written
after this I will return and will build again the tabernacle
of David which is fallen down and I will build again the
ruins thereof and I will set it up
that the residue of men might seek after the lord and all the
Gentiles upon whom my name is called saith the lord who
doeth all these things.
known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the
world.
wherefore my sentence is that we trouble not them which from
among the Gentiles are turned to God
but that we write unto them that they abstain from pollutions
of idols and from fornication and from things strangled and
from blood.
for Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him
being read in the synagogues every sabbath day.
then pleased it the apostles and elders with the whole church
to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch with Paul
and Barnabas namely Judas surnamed Barsabas and Silas chief
men among the brethren
and they wrote letters by them after this manner the apostles
and elders and brethren send greeting unto the brethren which
are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia.
forasmuch as we have heard that certain which went out from
us have troubled you with words subverting your souls
saying ye must be circumcised and keep the law to whom we
gave no such commandment
it seemed good unto us being assembled with one accord to
send chosen men unto you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul
men that have hazarded their lives for the name of our lord
Jesus Christ.
we have sent therefore Judas and Silas who shall also tell
you the same things by mouth.
for it seemed good to the holy ghost and to us to lay upon
you no greater burden than these necessary things
that ye abstain from meats offered to idols and from blood
and from things strangled and from fornication from which if
ye keep yourselves ye shall do well. fare ye well.
so when they were dismissed they came to Antioch and when
they had gathered the multitude together they delivered the
epistle
which when they had read they rejoiced for the consolation.
and Judas and Silas being prophets also themselves exhorted
the brethren with many words and confirmed them.
and after they had tarried there a space they were let go in
peace from the brethren unto the apostles.
notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there still.
Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch teaching and
preaching the word of the lord with many others also.
and some days after Paul said unto Barnabas let us go again
and visit our brethren in every city where we have preached
the word of the lord and see how they do.
and Barnabas determined to take with them John whose surname
was Mark.
but Paul thought not good to take him with them who departed
from them from Pamphylia and went not with them to the work.
and the contention was so Sharp between them that they
departed asunder one from the other and so Barnabas took
Mark and sailed unto Cyprus
and Paul chose Silas and departed being recommended by the
brethren unto the grace of God.
and he went through Syria and Cilicia confirming the
churches.
then came he to Derbe and Lystra and behold a certain
disciple was there named Timotheus the son of a certain
woman which was a Jewess and believed but his father was a
Greek
which was well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra
and Iconium.
him would Paul have to go forth with him and took and
circumcised him because of the Jews which were in those
quarters for they knew all that his father was a Greek.
and as they went through the cities they delivered them the
decrees for to keep that were ordained of the apostles and
elders which were at Jerusalem.
and so were the churches established in the faith and
increased in number daily.
now when they had gone throughout Phrygia and the region of
Galatia and were forbidden of the holy ghost to preach the
word in Asia
after they were come to Mysia they assayed to go into
Bithynia but the spirit suffered them not.
and they passing by Mysia came down to Troas.
and a vision appeared to Paul in the night there stood a man
of Macedonia and prayed him saying come over into
Macedonia and help us.
and after he had seen the vision Immediately we endeavoured
to go into Macedonia assuredly gathering that the lord had
called us for to preach the gospel unto them.
therefore loosing from Troas we came with a straight course
to Samothracia and the next day to Neapolis
and from thence to Philippi which is the chief city of that
part of Macedonia and a colony and we were in that city
abiding certain days.
and on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side
where prayer was wont to be made and we sat down and spake
unto the women which resorted thither.
and a certain woman named Lydia a seller of purple of the
city of Thyatira which worshipped God heard us whose heart
the lord opened that she attended unto the things which were
spoken of Paul.
and when she was baptized and her household she besought us
saying if ye have judged me to be faithful to the lord come
into my house and abide there. and she constrained us.
and it came to pass as we went to prayer a certain damsel
possessed with a spirit of divination met us which brought
her masters Much gain by soothsaying
the same followed Paul and us and cried saying these men
are the servants of the most high God which shew unto us the
way of salvation.
and this did she many days. but Paul being grieved turned
and said to the spirit I command thee in the name of Jesus
Christ to come out of her. and he came out the same hour.
and when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was
gone they caught Paul and Silas and drew them into the
marketplace unto the rulers
and brought them to the magistrates saying these men being
Jews do exceedingly trouble our city
and teach customs which are not lawful for us to receive
Neither to observe being Romans.
and the multitude rose up together against them and the
magistrates rent off their clothes and commanded to beat
them.
and when they had laid many stripes upon them they cast them
into prison charging the jailor to keep them safely
who having received such a charge thrust them into the inner
prison and made their feet fast in the stocks.
and at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang praises unto
God and the prisoners heard them.
and suddenly there was a great earthquake so that the
foundations of the prison were shaken and Immediately all the
doors were opened and every one s Bands were loosed.
and the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep and
seeing the prison doors open he drew out his sword and would
have killed himself supposing that the prisoners had been
fled.
but Paul cried with a loud voice saying do thyself no harm
for we are all here.
then he called for a light and sprang in and came trembling
and fell down before Paul and Silas
and brought them out and said sirs what must I do to be
saved?
and they said believe on the lord Jesus Christ and thou
shalt be saved and thy house.
and they spake unto him the word of the lord and to all that
were in his house.
and he took them the same hour of the night and washed their
stripes and was baptized he and all his straightway.
and when he had brought them into his house he set meat
before them and rejoiced believing in God with all his
house.
and when it was day the magistrates sent the serjeants
saying let those men go.
and the keeper of the prison told this saying to Paul the
magistrates have sent to let you go now therefore depart and
go in peace.
but Paul said unto them they have beaten us openly
uncondemned being Romans and have cast us into prison and
now do they thrust us out privily? nay verily but let them
come themselves and fetch us out.
and the serjeants told these words unto the magistrates and
they feared when they heard that they were Romans.
and they came and besought them and brought them out and
desired them to depart out of the city.
and they went out of the prison and entered into the house of
Lydia and when they had seen the brethren they comforted
them and departed.
now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia
they came to Thessalonica where was a synagogue of the Jews
and Paul as his manner was went in unto them and three
sabbath days reasoned with them out of the scriptures
opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered
and risen again from the dead and that this Jesus whom I
preach unto you is Christ.
and some of them believed and consorted with Paul and Silas
and of the devout Greeks a great multitude and of the chief
women not a few.
but the Jews which believed not moved with envy took unto
them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort and gathered a
company and set all the city on an uproar and assaulted the
house of Jason and sought to bring them out to the people.
and when they found them not they drew Jason and certain
brethren unto the rulers of the city crying these that have
turned the world upside down are come hither also
whom Jason hath received and these all do contrary to the
decrees of Caesar saying that there is another king one
Jesus.
and they troubled the people and the rulers of the city when
they heard these things.
and when they had taken security of Jason and of the other
they let them go.
and the brethren Immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night
unto Berea who coming thither went into the synagogue of the
Jews.
these were more noble than those in Thessalonica in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind and searched the
scriptures daily whether those things were so.
therefore many of them believed also of honourable women
which were Greeks and of men not a few.
but when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word
of God was preached of Paul at Berea they came thither also
and stirred up the people.
and then Immediately the brethren sent away Paul to go as it
were to the sea but Silas and Timotheus abode there still.
and they that conducted Paul brought him unto Athens and
receiving a commandment unto Silas and Timotheus for to come
to him with all speed they departed.
now while Paul waited for them at Athens his spirit was
stirred in him when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.
therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews and with
the devout persons and in the market daily with them that met
with him.
then certain philosophers of the Epicureans and of the
Stoicks encountered him. and some said what will this
babbler say? other some he seemeth to be a setter forth of
strange gods because he preached unto them Jesus and the
resurrection.
and they took him and brought him unto Areopagus saying may
we know what this new doctrine whereof thou speakest is?
for thou bringest certain strange things to our ears we would
know therefore what these things mean.
 for all the Athenians and strangers which were there spent
their time in nothing else but either to tell or to hear
some new thing.
then Paul stood in the midst of Mars hill and said ye men
of Athens I perceive that in all things ye are too
superstitious.
for as I passed by and beheld your devotions I found an
altar with this inscription to the unknown God. whom
therefore ye ignorantly worship him declare I unto you.
God that made the world and all things therein seeing that he
is lord of heaven and earth dwelleth not in temples made with
hands
Neither is worshipped with men s hands as though he needed
any thing seeing he giveth to all life and breath and all
things
and hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on
all the face of the earth and hath determined the times
before appointed and the bounds of their habitation
that they should seek the lord if haply they might feel after
him and find him though he be not far from every one of us
for in him we live and move and have our being as certain
also of your own poets have said for we are also his
offspring.
forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God we ought not to
think that the Godhead is like unto gold or Silver or stone
graven by art and man s device.
and the times of this ignorance God winked at but now
commandeth all men every where to repent
because he hath appointed a day in the which he will judge
the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained
whereof he hath given assurance unto all men in that he hath
raised him from the dead.
and when they heard of the resurrection of the dead some
mocked and others said we will hear thee again of this
matter.
so Paul departed from among them.
howbeit certain men clave unto him and believed among the
which was Dionysius the Areopagite and a woman named Damaris
and others with them.
after these things Paul departed from Athens and came to
Corinth
and found a certain Jew named Aquila born in Pontus lately
come from Italy with his wife Priscilla because that
Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome and came
unto them.
and because he was of the same craft he abode with them and
wrought for by their occupation they were tentmakers.
and he reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath and persuaded
the Jews and the Greeks.
and when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia Paul
was pressed in the spirit and testified to the Jews that
Jesus was Christ.
and when they opposed themselves and blasphemed he shook his
raiment and said unto them your blood be upon your own
heads I Am clean from henceforth I will go unto the
Gentiles.
and he departed thence and entered into a certain man s
house named Justus one that worshipped God whose house
joined hard to the synagogue.
and Crispus the chief ruler of the synagogue believed on the
lord with all his house and many of the Corinthians hearing
believed and were baptized.
then spake the lord to Paul in the night by a vision be not
afraid but speak and hold not thy peace
for I Am with thee and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee
for I have Much people in this city.
and he continued there a year and six months teaching the
word of God among them.
and when Gallio was the deputy of Achaia the Jews made
insurrection with one accord against Paul and brought him to
the judgment seat
saying this fellow persuadeth men to worship God contrary to
the law.
and when Paul was now about to open his mouth Gallio said
unto the Jews if it were a matter of wrong or wicked
lewdness O ye Jews reason would that I should bear with you
but if it be a question of words and names and of your law
look ye to it for I will be no judge of such matters.
and he drave them from the judgment seat.
then all the Greeks took Sosthenes the chief ruler of the
synagogue and beat him before the judgment seat. and Gallio
cared for none of those things.
and Paul after this tarried there yet a good while and then
took his leave of the brethren and sailed thence into Syria
and with him Priscilla and Aquila having shorn his head in
Cenchrea for he had a vow.
and he came to Ephesus and left them there but he himself
entered into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.
when they desired him to tarry longer time with them he
consented not
but bade them farewell saying I must by all means keep this
feast that cometh in Jerusalem but I will return again unto
you if God will. and he sailed from Ephesus.
and when he had landed at Caesarea and gone up and saluted
the church he went down to Antioch.
and after he had spent some time there he departed and went
over all the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order
strengthening all the disciples.
and a certain Jew named Apollos born at Alexandria an
eloquent man and Mighty in the scriptures came to Ephesus.
this man was instructed in the way of the lord and being
fervent in the spirit he spake and taught diligently the
things of the lord knowing only the baptism of John.
and he began to speak boldly in the synagogue whom when
Aquila and Priscilla had heard they took him unto them and
expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly.
and when he was disposed to pass into Achaia the brethren
wrote exhorting the disciples to receive him who when he
was come helped them Much which had believed through grace
for he mightily convinced the Jews and that publickly
shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was Christ.
and it came to pass that while Apollos was at Corinth Paul
having passed through the upper coasts came to Ephesus and
finding certain disciples
he said unto them have ye received the holy ghost since ye
believed? and they said unto him we have not so Much as heard
whether there be any holy ghost.
and he said unto them unto what then were ye baptized? and
they said unto John s baptism.
then said Paul John verily baptized with the baptism of
repentance saying unto the people that they should believe
on him which should come after him that is on Christ Jesus.
when they heard this they were baptized in the name of the
lord Jesus.
and when Paul had laid his hands upon them the holy ghost
came on them and they spake with tongues and prophesied.
and all the men were about twelve.
and he went into the synagogue and spake boldly for the space
of three months disputing and persuading the things
concerning the kingdom of God.
but when divers were hardened and believed not but spake
evil of that way before the multitude he departed from them
and separated the disciples disputing daily in the school of
one Tyrannus.
and this continued by the space of two years so that all they
which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the lord Jesus both
Jews and Greeks.
and God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul
so that from his body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs
or aprons and the diseases departed from them and the evil
spirits went out of them.
then certain of the vagabond Jews exorcists took upon them
to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the lord
Jesus saying we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth.
and there were seven sons of one Sceva a Jew and chief of
the priests which did so.
and the evil spirit answered and said Jesus I know and Paul
I know but who are ye?
and the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them and
overcame them and prevailed against them so that they fled
out of that house naked and wounded.
and this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at
Ephesus and fear fell on them all and the name of the lord
Jesus was magnified.
and many that believed came and confessed and shewed their
deeds.
many of them also which used curious arts brought their books
together and burned them before all men and they counted the
price of them and found it fifty thousand pieces of Silver.
so mightily grew the word of God and prevailed.
after these things were ended Paul purposed in the spirit
when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia to go to
Jerusalem saying after I have been there I must also see
Rome.
so he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto
him Timotheus and Erastus but he himself stayed in Asia for
a season.
and the same time there arose no small stir about that way.
for a certain man named Demetrius a silversmith which made
Silver shrines for Diana brought no small gain unto the
craftsmen
whom he called together with the workmen of like occupation
and said sirs ye know that by this craft we have our wealth.
moreover ye see and hear that not alone at Ephesus but
almost throughout all Asia this Paul hath persuaded and
turned away Much people saying that they be no gods which
are made with hands
so that not only this our craft is in danger to be set at
nought but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana
should be despised and her magnificence should be destroyed
whom all Asia and the world worshippeth.
and when they heard these sayings they were full of wrath
and cried out saying great is Diana of the Ephesians.
and the whole city was filled with confusion and having
caught Gaius and Aristarchus men of Macedonia Paul s
companions in travel they rushed with one accord into the
theatre.
and when Paul would have entered in unto the people the
disciples suffered him not.
and certain of the chief of Asia which were his friends sent
unto him desiring him that he would not adventure himself
into the theatre.
some therefore cried one thing and some another for the
assembly was confused and the more part knew not wherefore
they were come together.
and they drew Alexander out of the multitude the Jews putting
him forward. and Alexander beckoned with the hand and would
have made his defence unto the people.
but when they knew that he was a Jew all with one voice about
the space of two hours cried out great is Diana of the
Ephesians.
and when the townclerk had appeased the people he said ye
men of Ephesus what man is there that knoweth not how that
the city of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess
Diana and of the image which fell down from Jupiter?
seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against ye
ought to be quiet and to do nothing rashly.
for ye have brought hither these men which are Neither
robbers of churches nor yet blasphemers of your goddess.
wherefore if Demetrius and the craftsmen which are with him
have a matter against any man the law is open and there are
deputies let them implead one another.
but if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters it shall
be determined in a lawful assembly.
for we are in danger to be called in question for this day s
uproar there being no cause whereby we may give an account of
this concourse.
and when he had thus spoken he dismissed the assembly.
and after the uproar was ceased Paul called unto him the
disciples and embraced them and departed for to go into
Macedonia.
and when he had gone over those parts and had given them Much
exhortation he came into Greece
and there abode three months. and when the Jews laid wait for
him as he was about to sail into Syria he purposed to return
through Macedonia.
and there accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea and of
the Thessalonians Aristarchus and Secundus and Gaius of
Derbe and Timotheus and of Asia Tychicus and Trophimus.
these going before tarried for us at Troas.
and we sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened
bread and came unto them to Troas in five days where we
abode seven days.
and upon the first day of the week when the disciples came
together to break bread Paul preached unto them ready to
depart on the morrow and continued his speech until midnight.
and there were many lights in the upper chamber where they
were gathered together.
and there sat in a window a certain young man named Eutychus
being fallen into a deep sleep and as Paul was long
preaching he sunk down with sleep and fell down from the
third loft and was taken up dead.
and Paul went down and fell on him and embracing him said
trouble not yourselves for his life is in him.
when he therefore was come up again and had broken bread and
eaten and talked a long while even till break of day so he
departed.
and they brought the young man alive and were not a little
comforted.
and we went before to ship and sailed unto Assos there
intending to take in Paul for so had he appointed minding
himself to go afoot.
and when he met with us at Assos we took him in and came to
Mitylene.
and we sailed thence and came the next day over against
Chios and the next day we arrived at Samos and tarried at
Trogyllium and the next day we came to Miletus.
for Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus because he would
not spend the time in Asia for he hasted if it were possible
for him to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost.
and from Miletus he sent to Ephesus and called the elders of
the church.
and when they were come to him he said unto them ye know
from the first day that I came into Asia after what manner I
have been with you at all seasons
serving the lord with all humility of mind and with many
tears and temptations which befell me by the lying in wait
of the Jews
and how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you but
have shewed you and have taught you publickly and from house
to house
testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks
repentance toward God and faith toward our lord Jesus Christ.
and now behold I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem not
knowing the things that shall befall me there
save that the holy ghost witnesseth in every city saying that
bonds and afflictions abide me.
but none of these things move me Neither count I my life dear
unto myself so that I might finish my course with joy and
the ministry which I have received of the lord Jesus to
testify the gospel of the grace of God.
and now behold I know that ye all among whom I have gone
preaching the kingdom of God shall see my face no more.
wherefore I take you to record this day that I Am pure from
the blood of all men.
for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of
God.
take heed therefore unto yourselves and to all the flock
over the which the holy ghost hath made you overseers to feed
the church of God which he hath purchased with his own blood.
for I know this that after my departing shall grievous wolves
enter in among you not sparing the flock.
also of your own selves shall men Arise speaking perverse
things to draw away disciples after them.
therefore watch and remember that by the space of three
years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.
and now brethren I commend you to God and to the word of
his grace which is able to build you up and to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified.
I have coveted no man s Silver or gold or apparel.
yea ye yourselves know that these hands have ministered unto
my necessities and to them that were with me.
I have shewed you all things how that so labouring ye ought
to support the weak and to remember the words of the lord
Jesus how he said it is more blessed to give than to
receive.
and when he had thus spoken he kneeled down and prayed with
them all.
and they all wept sore and fell on Paul s neck and kissed
him
sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake that they
should see his face no more. and they accompanied him unto the
ship.
and it came to pass that after we were gotten from them and
had launched we came with a straight course unto Coos and
the day following unto Rhodes and from thence unto Patara
and finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia we went aboard
and set forth.
now when we had discovered Cyprus we left it on the left
hand and sailed into Syria and landed at Tyre for there the
ship was to unlade her burden.
and finding disciples we tarried there seven days who said
to Paul through the spirit that he should not go up to
Jerusalem.
and when we had accomplished those days we departed and went
our way and they all brought us on our way with wives and
children till we were out of the city and we kneeled down on
the shore and prayed.
and when we had taken our leave one of another we took ship
and they returned home again.
and when we had finished our course from Tyre we came to
Ptolemais and saluted the brethren and abode with them one
day.
and the next day we that were of Paul s company departed and
came unto Caesarea and we entered into the house of Philip
the evangelist which was one of the seven and abode with
him.
and the same man had four daughters virgins which did
prophesy.
and as we tarried there many days there came down from Judaea
a certain prophet named Agabus.
and when he was come unto us he took Paul s girdle and bound
his own hands and feet and said thus saith the holy ghost
so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this
girdle and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.
and when we heard these things both we and they of that
place besought him not to go up to Jerusalem.
then Paul answered what mean ye to weep and to break mine
heart? for I Am ready not to be bound only but also to die at
Jerusalem for the name of the lord Jesus.
and when he would not be persuaded we ceased saying the
will of the lord be done.
and after those days we took up our carriages and went up to
Jerusalem.
there went with us also certain of the disciples of Caesarea
and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus an old disciple
with whom we should lodge.
and when we were come to Jerusalem the brethren received us
gladly.
and the day following Paul went in with us unto James and all
the elders were present.
and when he had saluted them he declared particularly what
things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry.
and when they heard it they glorified the lord and said unto
him thou seest brother how many thousands of Jews there are
which believe and they are all zealous of the law
and they are informed of thee that thou teachest all the Jews
which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses saying that
they ought not to circumcise their children Neither to walk
after the customs.
what is it therefore? the multitude must needs come together
for they will hear that thou art come.
do therefore this that we say to thee we have four men which
have a vow on them
them take and purify thyself with them and be at charges
with them that they may shave their heads and all may know
that those things whereof they were informed concerning thee
are nothing but that thou thyself also walkest orderly and
keepest the law.
as touching the Gentiles which believe we have written and
concluded that they observe no such thing save only that they
keep themselves from things offered to idols and from blood
and from strangled and from fornication.
then Paul took the men and the next day purifying himself
with them entered into the temple to signify the
accomplishment of the days of purification until that an
offering should be offered for every one of them.
and when the seven days were almost ended the Jews which were
of Asia when they saw him in the temple stirred up all the
people and laid hands on him
crying out men of Israel help this is the man that
teacheth all men every where against the people and the law
and this place and further brought Greeks also into the
temple and hath polluted this holy place.
 for they had seen before with him in the city Trophimus an
Ephesian whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the
temple.
and all the city was moved and the people ran together and
they took Paul and drew him out of the temple and forthwith
the doors were shut.
and as they went about to kill him tidings came unto the
chief captain of the band that all Jerusalem was in an
uproar.
who Immediately took soldiers and centurions and ran down
unto them and when they saw the chief captain and the
soldiers they left beating of Paul.
then the chief captain came near and took him and commanded
him to be bound with two chains and demanded who he was and
what he had done.
and some cried one thing some another among the multitude
and when he could not know the certainty for the tumult he
commanded him to be carried into the castle.
and when he came upon the stairs so it was that he was borne
of the soldiers for the violence of the people.
for the multitude of the people followed after crying away
with him.
and as Paul was to be led into the castle he said unto the
chief captain may I speak unto thee? who said canst thou
speak Greek?
art not thou that Egyptian which before these days madest an
uproar and leddest out into the wilderness four thousand men
that were murderers?
but Paul said I Am a man which Am a Jew of Tarsus a city in
Cilicia a citizen of no mean city and I beseech thee
suffer me to speak unto the people.
and when he had given him licence Paul stood on the stairs
and beckoned with the hand unto the people. and when there was
made a great silence he spake unto them in the Hebrew tongue
saying
men brethren and fathers hear ye my defence which I make
now unto you.
 and when they heard that he spake in the Hebrew tongue to
them they kept the more silence and he saith
I Am verily a man which Am a Jew born in Tarsus a city in
Cilicia yet brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel
and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the
fathers and was zealous toward God as ye all are this day.
and I persecuted this way unto the death binding and
delivering into prisons both men and women.
as also the high priest doth bear me witness and all the
estate of the elders from whom also I received letters unto
the brethren and went to Damascus to bring them which were
there bound unto Jerusalem for to be punished.
and it came to pass that as I made my journey and was come
nigh unto Damascus about noon suddenly there shone from
heaven a great light round about me.
and I fell unto the ground and heard a voice saying unto me
Saul Saul why persecutest thou me?
and I answered who art thou lord? and he said unto me I Am
Jesus of Nazareth whom thou persecutest.
and they that were with me saw indeed the light and were
afraid but they heard not the voice of him that spake to me.
and I said what shall I do lord? and the lord said unto me
Arise and go into Damascus and there it shall be told thee
of all things which are appointed for thee to do.
and when I could not see for the glory of that light being
led by the hand of them that were with me I came into
Damascus.
and one Ananias a devout man according to the law having a
good report of all the Jews which dwelt there
came unto me and stood and said unto me brother Saul
receive thy sight. and the same hour I looked up upon him.
and he said the God of our fathers hath chosen thee that
thou shouldest know his will and see that just one and
shouldest hear the voice of his mouth.
for thou shalt be his witness unto all men of what thou hast
seen and heard.
and now why tarriest thou? Arise and be baptized and wash
away thy sins calling on the name of the lord.
and it came to pass that when I was come again to Jerusalem
even while I prayed in the temple I was in a trance
and saw him saying unto me make haste and get thee quickly
out of Jerusalem for they will not receive thy testimony
concerning me.
and I said lord they know that I imprisoned and beat in
every synagogue them that believed on thee
and when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed I also was
standing by and consenting unto his death and kept the
raiment of them that slew him.
and he said unto me depart for I will send thee far hence
unto the Gentiles.
and they gave him audience unto this word and then lifted up
their voices and said away with such a fellow from the
earth for it is not fit that he should live.
and as they cried out and cast off their clothes and threw
dust into the air
the chief captain commanded him to be brought into the castle
and bade that he should be examined by scourging that he
might know wherefore they cried so against him.
and as they bound him with thongs Paul said unto the
centurion that stood by is it lawful for you to scourge a man
that is a Roman and uncondemned?
when the centurion heard that he went and told the chief
captain saying take heed what thou doest for this man is a
Roman.
then the chief captain came and said unto him tell me art
thou a Roman? he said yea.
and the chief captain answered with a great sum obtained I
this freedom. and Paul said but I was free born.
then straightway they departed from him which should have
examined him and the chief captain also was afraid after he
knew that he was a Roman and because he had bound him.
on the morrow because he would have known the certainty
wherefore he was accused of the Jews he loosed him from his
Bands and commanded the chief priests and all their council
to appear and brought Paul down and set him before them.
and Paul earnestly beholding the council said men and
brethren I have lived in all good conscience before God until
this day.
and the high priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him
to smite him on the mouth.
then said Paul unto him God shall smite thee thou whited
wall for sittest thou to judge me after the law and
commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?
and they that stood by said revilest thou God s high priest?
then said Paul I wist not brethren that he was the high
priest for it is written thou shalt not speak evil of the
ruler of thy people.
but when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees and
the other Pharisees he cried out in the council men and
brethren I Am a Pharisee the son of a Pharisee of the hope
and resurrection of the dead I Am called in question.
and when he had so said there arose a dissension between the
Pharisees and the Sadducees and the multitude was divided.
for the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection Neither
angel nor spirit but the Pharisees confess both.
and there arose a great cry and the scribes that were of the
Pharisees part arose and strove saying we find no evil in
this man but if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him let
us not fight against God.
and when there arose a great dissension the chief captain
fearing lest Paul should have been pulled in pieces of them
commanded the soldiers to go down and to take him by force
from among them and to bring him into the castle.
and the night following the lord stood by him and said be of
good cheer Paul for as thou hast testified of me in
Jerusalem so must thou bear witness also at Rome.
and when it was day certain of the Jews banded together and
bound themselves under a curse saying that they would Neither
eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.
and they were more than forty which had made this conspiracy.
and they came to the chief priests and elders and said we
have bound ourselves under a great curse that we will eat
nothing until we have slain Paul.
now therefore ye with the council signify to the chief captain
that he bring him down unto you to morrow as though ye would
enquire something more perfectly concerning him and we or
ever he come near are ready to kill him.
and when Paul s sister s son heard of their lying in wait he
went and entered into the castle and told Paul.
then Paul called one of the centurions unto him and said
bring this young man unto the chief captain for he hath a
certain thing to tell him.
so he took him and brought him to the chief captain and
said Paul the prisoner called me unto him and prayed me to
bring this young man unto thee who hath something to say unto
thee.
then the chief captain took him by the hand and went with him
aside privately and asked him what is that thou hast to tell
me?
and he said the Jews have agreed to desire thee that thou
wouldest bring down Paul to morrow into the council as though
they would enquire somewhat of him more perfectly.
but do not thou yield unto them for there lie in wait for him
of them more than forty men which have bound themselves with
an oath that they will Neither eat nor drink till they have
killed him and now are they ready looking for a promise from
thee.
so the chief captain then let the young man depart and
charged him see thou tell no man that thou hast shewed these
things to me.
and he called unto him two centurions saying make ready two
hundred soldiers to go to Caesarea and horsemen threescore
and Ten and spearmen two hundred at the third hour of the
night
and provide them beasts that they may set Paul on and bring
him safe unto Felix the Governor.
and he wrote a letter after this manner
Claudius Lysias unto the most excellent Governor Felix sendeth
greeting.
this man was taken of the Jews and should have been killed of
them then came I with an army and rescued him having
understood that he was a Roman.
and when I would have known the cause wherefore they accused
him I brought him forth into their council
whom I perceived to be accused of questions of their law but
to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of death or of
bonds.
and when it was told me how that the Jews laid wait for the
man I sent straightway to thee and gave commandment to his
accusers also to say before thee what they had against him.
farewell.
then the soldiers as it was commanded them took Paul and
brought him by night to Antipatris.
on the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him and
returned to the castle
who when they came to Caesarea and delivered the epistle to
the Governor presented Paul also before him.
and when the Governor had read the letter he asked of what
province he was. and when he understood that he was of
Cilicia
I will hear thee said he when thine accusers are also come.
and he commanded him to be kept in Herod s judgment hall.
and after five days Ananias the high priest descended with the
elders and with a certain orator named Tertullus who
informed the Governor against Paul.
and when he was called forth Tertullus began to accuse him
saying seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness and that
very worthy deeds are done unto this nation by thy providence
we accept it always and in all places most noble Felix with
all thankfulness.
notwithstanding that I be not further tedious unto thee I
pray thee that thou wouldest hear us of thy clemency a few
words.
for we have found this man a pestilent fellow and a mover of
sedition among all the Jews throughout the world and a
ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes
who also hath gone about to profane the temple whom we took
and would have judged according to our law.
but the chief captain Lysias came upon us and with great
violence took him away out of our hands
commanding his accusers to come unto thee by examining of
whom thyself mayest take knowledge of all these things
whereof we accuse him.
and the Jews also assented saying that these things were so.
then Paul after that the Governor had beckoned unto him to
speak answered forasmuch as I know that thou hast been of
many years a judge unto this nation I do the more cheerfully
answer for myself
because that thou mayest understand that there are yet but
twelve days since I went up to Jerusalem for to worship.
and they Neither found me in the temple disputing with any
man Neither raising up the people Neither in the synagogues
nor in the city
Neither can they prove the things whereof they now accuse me.
but this I confess unto thee that after the way which they
call heresy so worship I the God of my fathers believing all
things which are written in the law and in the prophets
and have hope toward God which they themselves also allow
that there shall be a resurrection of the dead both of the
just and unjust.
and herein do I exercise myself to have always a conscience
void to offence toward God and toward men.
now after many years I came to bring alms to my nation and
offerings.
whereupon certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the
temple Neither with multitude nor with tumult.
who ought to have been here before thee and object if they
had ought against me.
or else let these same here say if they have found any evil
doing in me while I stood before the council
except it be for this one voice that I cried standing among
them touching the resurrection of the dead I Am called in
question by you this day.
and when Felix heard these things having more perfect
knowledge of that way he deferred them and said when Lysias
the chief captain shall come down I will know the uttermost
of your matter.
and he commanded a centurion to keep Paul and to let him have
liberty and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to
minister or come unto him.
and after certain days when Felix came with his wife
Drusilla which was a Jewess he sent for Paul and heard him
concerning the faith in Christ.
and as he reasoned of righteousness temperance and judgment
to come Felix trembled and answered go thy way for this
time when I have a convenient season I will call for thee.
he hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul
that he might loose him wherefore he sent for him the
oftener and communed with him.
but after two years Porcius Festus came into Felix room and
Felix willing to shew the Jews a pleasure left Paul bound.
now when Festus was come into the province after three days
he ascended from Caesarea to Jerusalem.
then the high priest and the chief of the Jews informed him
against Paul and besought him
and desired favour against him that he would send for him to
Jerusalem laying wait in the way to kill him.
but Festus answered that Paul should be kept at Caesarea and
that he himself would depart shortly thither.
let them therefore said he which among you are able go down
with me and accuse this man if there be any wickedness in
him.
and when he had tarried among them more than Ten days he went
down unto Caesarea and the next day sitting on the judgment
seat commanded Paul to be brought.
and when he was come the Jews which came down from Jerusalem
stood round about and laid many and grievous complaints
against Paul which they could not prove.
while he answered for himself Neither against the law of the
Jews Neither against the temple nor yet against Caesar have
I offended any thing at all.
but Festus willing to do the Jews a pleasure answered Paul
and said wilt thou go up to Jerusalem and there be judged of
these things before me?
then said Paul I stand at Caesar s judgment seat where I
ought to be judged to the Jews have I done no wrong as thou
very well knowest.
for if I be an offender or have committed any thing worthy of
death I refuse not to die but if there be none of these
things whereof these accuse me no man may deliver me unto
them. I appeal unto Caesar.
then Festus when he had conferred with the council answered
hast thou appealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar shalt thou go.
and after certain days king Agrippa and Bernice came unto
Caesarea to salute Festus.
and when they had been there many days Festus declared Paul s
cause unto the king saying there is a certain man left in
bonds by Felix
about whom when I was at Jerusalem the chief priests and the
elders of the Jews informed me desiring to have judgment
against him.
to whom I answered it is not the manner of the Romans to
deliver any man to die before that he which is accused have
the accusers face to face and have licence to answer for
himself concerning the crime laid against him.
therefore when they were come hither without any delay on
the morrow I sat on the judgment seat and commanded the man
to be brought forth.
against whom when the accusers stood up they brought none
accusation of such things as I supposed
but had certain questions against him of their own
superstition and of one Jesus which was dead whom Paul
affirmed to be alive.
and because I doubted of such manner of questions I asked him
whether he would go to Jerusalem and there be judged of these
matters.
but when Paul had appealed to be reserved unto the hearing of
Augustus I commanded him to be kept till I might send him to
Caesar.
then Agrippa said unto Festus I would also hear the man
myself. to morrow said he thou shalt hear him.
and on the morrow when Agrippa was come and Bernice with
great pomp and was entered into the place of hearing with
the chief captains and principal men of the city at Festus
commandment Paul was brought forth.
and Festus said king Agrippa and all men which are here
present with us ye see this man about whom all the multitude
of the Jews have dealt with me both at Jerusalem and also
here crying that he ought not to live any longer.
but when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of
death and that he himself hath appealed to Augustus I have
determined to send him.
of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my lord.
wherefore I have brought him forth before you and specially
before thee O king Agrippa that after examination had I
might have somewhat to write.
for it seemeth to me unreasonable to send a prisoner and not
withal to signify the crimes laid against him.
then Agrippa said unto Paul thou art permitted to speak for
thyself. then Paul stretched forth the hand and answered for
himself
I think myself happy king Agrippa because I shall answer for
myself this day before thee touching all the things whereof I
Am accused of the Jews
especially because I know thee to be expert in all customs and
questions which are among the Jews wherefore I beseech thee
to hear me patiently.
my manner of life from my youth which was at the first among
mine own nation at Jerusalem know all the Jews
which knew me from the beginning if they would testify that
after the most straitest sect of our religion I lived a
Pharisee.
and now I stand and Am judged for the hope of the promise made
of God unto our fathers
unto which promise our twelve tribes instantly serving God
day and night hope to come. for which hope s sake king
Agrippa I Am accused of the Jews.
why should it be thought a thing incredible with you that God
should raise the dead?
I verily thought with myself that I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
which thing I also did in Jerusalem and many of the saints
did I shut up in prison having received authority from the
chief priests and when they were put to death I gave my
voice against them.
and I punished them oft in every synagogue and compelled them
to blaspheme and being exceedingly mad against them I
persecuted them even unto strange cities.
whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission
from the chief priests
at midday O king I saw in the way a light from heaven above
the brightness of the sun shining round about me and them
which journeyed with me.
and when we were all fallen to the earth I heard a voice
speaking unto me and saying in the Hebrew tongue Saul Saul
why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against
the pricks.
and I said who art thou lord? and he said I Am Jesus whom
thou persecutest.
but rise and stand upon thy feet for I have appeared unto
thee for this purpose to make thee a minister and a witness
both of these things which thou hast seen and of those things
in the which I will appear unto thee
delivering thee from the people and from the Gentiles unto
whom now I send thee
to open their eyes and to turn them from darkness to light
and from the power of Satan unto God that they may receive
forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith that is in me.
whereupon O king Agrippa I was not disobedient unto the
heavenly vision
but shewed first unto them of Damascus and at Jerusalem and
throughout all the coasts of Judaea and then to the Gentiles
that they should repent and turn to God and do works meet for
repentance.
for these causes the Jews caught me in the temple and went
about to kill me.
having therefore obtained help of God I continue unto this
day witnessing both to small and great saying none other
things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should
come
that Christ should suffer and that he should be the first
that should rise from the dead and should shew light unto the
people and to the Gentiles.
and as he thus spake for himself Festus said with a loud
voice Paul thou art beside thyself Much learning doth make
thee mad.
but he said I Am not mad most noble Festus but speak forth
the words of truth and soberness.
for the king knoweth of these things before whom also I speak
freely for I Am persuaded that none of these things are
hidden from him for this thing was not done in a corner.
king Agrippa believest thou the prophets? I know that thou
believest.
then Agrippa said unto Paul almost thou persuadest me to be a
Christian.
and Paul said I would to God that not only thou but also
all that hear me this day were both almost and altogether
such as I Am except these bonds.
and when he had thus spoken the king rose up and the
Governor and Bernice and they that sat with them
and when they were gone aside they talked between themselves
saying this man doeth nothing worthy of death or of bonds.
then said Agrippa unto Festus this man might have been set at
liberty if he had not appealed unto Caesar.
and when it was determined that we should sail into Italy
they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners unto one named
Julius a centurion of Augustus band.
and entering into a ship of Adramyttium we launched meaning
to sail by the coasts of Asia one Aristarchus a Macedonian
of Thessalonica being with us.
and the next day we touched at Sidon. and Julius courteously
entreated Paul and gave him liberty to go unto his friends to
refresh himself.
and when we had launched from thence we sailed under Cyprus
because the winds were contrary.
and when we had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia
we came to Myra a city of Lycia.
and there the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing
into Italy and he put us therein.
and when we had sailed slowly many days and scarce were come
over against Cnidus the wind not suffering us we sailed
under Crete over against Salmone
and hardly passing it came unto a place which is called the
fair havens nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea.
now when Much time was spent and when sailing was now
dangerous because the fast was now already past Paul
admonished them
and said unto them sirs I perceive that this voyage will be
with hurt and Much damage not only of the lading and ship
but also of our lives.
nevertheless the centurion believed the Master and the owner
of the ship more than those things which were spoken by Paul.
and because the haven was not commodious to winter in the
more part advised to depart thence also if by any means they
might attain to Phenice and there to winter which is an
haven of Crete and lieth toward the south west and north
west.
and when the south wind blew softly supposing that they had
obtained their purpose loosing thence they sailed close by
Crete.
but not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind
called Euroclydon.
and when the ship was caught and could not bear up into the
wind we let her drive.
and running under a certain island which is called Clauda we
had Much work to come by the boat
which when they had taken up they used helps undergirding
the ship and fearing lest they should fall into the
quicksands strake sail and so were driven.
and we being exceedingly tossed with a tempest the next day
they lightened the ship
and the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling
of the ship.
and when Neither sun nor stars in many days appeared and no
small tempest lay on us all hope that we should be saved was
then taken away.
but after long abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of
them and said sirs ye should have hearkened unto me and
not have loosed from Crete and to have gained this harm and
loss.
and now I exhort you to be of good cheer for there shall be
no loss of any man s life among you but of the ship.
for there stood by me this night the angel of God whose I Am
and whom I serve
saying fear not Paul thou must be brought before Caesar
and lo God hath given thee all them that sail with thee.
wherefore sirs be of good cheer for I believe God that it
shall be even as it was told me.
howbeit we must be cast upon a certain island.
but when the fourteenth night was come as we were driven up
and down in Adria about midnight the shipmen deemed that they
drew near to some country
and sounded and found it twenty fathoms and when they had
gone a little further they sounded again and found it
fifteen fathoms.
then fearing lest we should have fallen upon rocks they cast
four anchors out of the stern and wished for the day.
and as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship when
they had let down the boat into the sea under colour as
though they would have cast anchors out of the foreship
Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers except these
abide in the ship ye cannot be saved.
then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat and let her
fall off.
and while the day was coming on Paul besought them all to
take meat saying this day is the fourteenth day that ye have
tarried and continued fasting having taken nothing.
wherefore I pray you to take some meat for this is for your
health for there shall not an hair fall from the head of any
of you.
and when he had thus spoken he took bread and gave thanks to
God in presence of them all and when he had broken it he
began to eat.
then were they all of good cheer and they also took some
meat.
and we were in all in the ship two hundred threescore and
sixteen souls.
and when they had eaten enough they lightened the ship and
cast out the wheat into the sea.
and when it was day they knew not the land but they
discovered a certain creek with a shore into the which they
were minded if it were possible to thrust in the ship.
and when they had taken up the anchors they committed
themselves unto the sea and loosed the rudder Bands and
hoised up the mainsail to the wind and made toward shore.
and falling into a place where two seas met they ran the ship
aground and the forepart stuck fast and remained unmoveable
but the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves.
and the soldiers counsel was to kill the prisoners lest any
of them should swim out and escape.
but the centurion willing to save Paul kept them from their
purpose and commanded that they which could swim should cast
themselves first into the sea and get to land
and the rest some on boards and some on broken pieces of the
ship. and so it came to pass that they escaped all safe to
land.
and when they were escaped then they knew that the island was
called Melita.
and the barbarous people shewed us no little kindness for
they kindled a fire and received us every one because of the
present rain and because of the cold.
and when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and laid them
on the fire there came a viper out of the heat and fastened
on his hand.
and when the Barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his
hand they said among themselves no doubt this man is a
murderer whom though he hath escaped the sea yet vengeance
suffereth not to live.
and he shook off the beast into the fire and felt no harm.
howbeit they looked when he should have swollen or fallen
down dead suddenly but after they had looked a great while
and saw no harm come to him they changed their minds and
said that he was a God.
in the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the
island whose name was Publius who received us and lodged us
three days courteously.
and it came to pass that the father of Publius lay sick of a
fever and of a bloody flux to whom Paul entered in and
prayed and laid his hands on him and healed him.
so when this was done others also which had diseases in the
island came and were healed
who also honoured us with many honours and when we departed
they laded us with such things as were necessary.
and after three months we departed in a ship of Alexandria
which had wintered in the isle whose sign was Castor and
Pollux.
and landing at Syracuse we tarried there three days.
and from thence we fetched a compass and came to Rhegium and
after one day the south wind blew and we came the next day to
Puteoli
where we found brethren and were desired to tarry with them
seven days and so we went toward Rome.
and from thence when the brethren heard of us they came to
meet us as far as Appii forum and the three taverns whom
when Paul saw he thanked God and took courage.
and when we came to Rome the centurion delivered the
prisoners to the captain of the guard but Paul was suffered
to dwell by himself with a soldier that kept him.
and it came to pass that after three days Paul called the
chief of the Jews together and when they were come together
he said unto them men and brethren though I have committed
nothing against the people or customs of our fathers yet was
I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the
Romans.
who when they had examined me would have let me go because
there was no cause of death in me.
but when the Jews spake against it I was constrained to
appeal unto Caesar not that I had ought to accuse my nation
of.
for this cause therefore have I called for you to see you
and to speak with you because that for the hope of Israel I
Am bound with this chain.
and they said unto him we Neither received letters out of
Judaea concerning thee Neither any of the brethren that came
shewed or spake any harm of thee.
but we desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest for as
concerning this sect we know that every where it is spoken
against.
and when they had appointed him a day there came many to him
into his lodging to whom he expounded and testified the
kingdom of God persuading them concerning Jesus both out of
the law of Moses and out of the prophets from morning till
evening.
and some believed the things which were spoken and some
believed not.
and when they agreed not among themselves they departed
after that Paul had spoken one word well spake the holy ghost
by Esaias the prophet unto our fathers
saying go unto this people and say hearing ye shall hear
and shall not understand and seeing ye shall see and not
perceive
for the heart of this people is waxed gross and their ears
are dull of hearing and their eyes have they closed lest
they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears and
understand with their heart and should be converted and I
should heal them.
be it known therefore unto you that the salvation of God is
sent unto the Gentiles and that they will hear it.
and when he had said these words the Jews departed and had
great reasoning among themselves.
and Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house and
received all that came in unto him
preaching the kingdom of God and teaching those things which
concern the lord Jesus Christ with all confidence no man
forbidding him.
Paul a servant of Jesus Christ called to be an apostle
separated unto the gospel of God
 which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy
scriptures
concerning his son Jesus Christ our lord which was made of
the seed of David according to the flesh
and declared to be the son of God with power according to the
spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the dead
by whom we have received grace and apostleship for obedience
to the faith among all nations for his name
among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ
to all that be in Rome beloved of God called to be saints
grace to you and peace from God our father and the lord Jesus
Christ.
first I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all that
your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.
for God is my witness whom I serve with my spirit in the
gospel of his son that without ceasing I make mention of you
always in my prayers
making request if by any means now at length I might have a
prosperous journey by the will of God to come unto you.
for I long to see you that I may impart unto you some
spiritual gift to the end ye may be established
that is that I may be comforted together with you by the
mutual faith both of you and me.
now I would not have you ignorant brethren that oftentimes I
purposed to come unto you but was let hitherto that I
might have some fruit among you also even as among other
Gentiles.
I Am debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians both to
the wise and to the unwise.
so as Much as in me is I Am ready to preach the gospel to
you that are at Rome also.
for I Am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ for it is the
power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth to
the Jew first and also to the Greek.
for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith as it is written the just shall live by faith.
for the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who hold the truth in
unrighteousness
because that which may be known of God is manifest in them
for God hath shewed it unto them.
for the invisible things of him from the creation of the world
are clearly seen being understood by the things that are
made even his eternal power and Godhead so that they are
without excuse
because that when they knew God they glorified him not as
God Neither were thankful but became vain in their
imaginations and their foolish heart was darkened.
professing themselves to be wise they became fools
and changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image
made like to corruptible man and to birds and fourfooted
beasts and creeping things.
wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the
lusts of their own hearts to dishonour their own bodies
between themselves
who changed the truth of God into a lie and worshipped and
served the creature more than the creator who is blessed for
ever. Amen.
for this cause God gave them up unto vile affections for even
their women did change the natural use into that which is
against nature
and likewise also the men leaving the natural use of the
woman burned in their lust one toward another men with men
working that which is unseemly and receiving in themselves
that recompence of their error which was meet.
and even as they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge God gave them over to a reprobate mind to do those
things which are not convenient
being filled with all unrighteousness fornication
wickedness covetousness maliciousness full of envy murder
debate deceit malignity whisperers
Backbiters haters of God despiteful proud boasters
inventors of evil things disobedient to parents
without understanding covenantbreakers without natural
affection implacable unmerciful
who knowing the judgment of God that they which commit such
things are worthy of death not only do the same but have
pleasure in them that do them.
therefore thou art inexcusable O man whosoever thou art that
judgest for wherein thou judgest another thou condemnest
thyself for thou that judgest doest the same things.
but we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth
against them which commit such things.
and thinkest thou this O man that judgest them which do such
things and doest the same that thou shalt escape the
judgment of God?
or despisest thou the Riches of his goodness and forbearance
and longsuffering not knowing that the goodness of God
leadeth thee to repentance?
but after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto
thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God
who will render to every man according to his deeds
to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for
glory and honour and immortality eternal life
but unto them that are contentious and do not obey the truth
but obey unrighteousness indignation and wrath
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that doeth
evil of the Jew first and also of the Gentile
but glory honour and peace to every man that worketh good
to the Jew first and also to the Gentile
for there is no respect of persons with God.
for as many as have sinned without law shall also perish
without law and as many as have sinned in the law shall be
judged by the law
 for not the hearers of the law are just before God but the
doers of the law shall be justified.
for when the Gentiles which have not the law do by nature
the things contained in the law these having not the law
are a law unto themselves
which shew the work of the law written in their hearts their
conscience also bearing witness and their thoughts the mean
while accusing or else excusing one another
in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ according to my gospel.
behold thou art called a Jew and restest in the law and
makest thy boast of God
and knowest his will and approvest the things that are more
excellent being instructed out of the law
and art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind
a light of them which are in darkness
an instructor of the foolish a teacher of babes which hast
the form of knowledge and of the truth in the law.
thou therefore which teachest another teachest thou not
thyself? thou that preachest a man should not steal dost thou
steal?
thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery dost thou
commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols dost thou commit
sacrilege?
thou that makest thy boast of the law through breaking the
law dishonourest thou God?
for the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through
you as it is written.
for circumcision verily profiteth if thou keep the law but
if thou be a breaker of the law thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision.
therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the
law shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?
and shall not uncircumcision which is by nature if it fulfil
the law judge thee who by the letter and circumcision dost
transgress the law?
for he is not a Jew which is one outwardly Neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh
but he is a Jew which is one inwardly and circumcision is
that of the heart in the spirit and not in the letter whose
praise is not of men but of God.
what advantage then hath the Jew? or what profit is there of
circumcision?
Much every way chiefly because that unto them were committed
the oracles of God.
for what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make
the faith of God without effect?
God forbid yea let God be true but every man a liar as it
is written that thou mightest be justified in thy sayings
and mightest overcome when thou art judged.
but if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God
what shall we say? is God unrighteous who taketh vengeance? I
speak as a man
God forbid for then how shall God judge the world?
for if the truth of God hath more abounded through my lie unto
his glory why yet Am I also judged as a sinner?
and not rather as we be slanderously reported and as some
affirm that we say let us do evil that good may come? whose
damnation is just.
what then? are we better than they? no in no wise for we
have before proved both Jews and Gentiles that they are all
under Sin
as it is written there is none righteous no not one
there is none that understandeth there is none that seeketh
after God.
they are all gone out of the way they are together become
unprofitable there is none that doeth good no not one.
their throat is an open sepulchre with their tongues they
have used deceit the poison of asps is under their lips
whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness
their feet are swift to shed blood
destruction and misery are in their ways
and the way of peace have they not known
there is no fear of God before their eyes.
now we know that what things soever the law saith it saith to
them who are under the law that every mouth may be stopped
and all the world may become guilty before God.
therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight for by the law is the knowledge of
Sin.
but now the righteousness of God without the law is
manifested being witnessed by the law and the prophets
even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus
Christ unto all and upon all them that believe for there is
no difference
for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God
being justified freely by his grace through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus
whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
his blood to declare his righteousness for the remission of
sins that are past through the forbearance of God
to declare I say at this time his righteousness that he
might be just and the justifier of him which believeth in
Jesus.
where is boasting then? it is excluded. by what law? of works?
nay but by the law of faith.
therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without
the deeds of the law.
is he the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the
Gentiles? yes of the Gentiles also
seeing it is one God which shall justify the circumcision by
faith and uncircumcision through faith.
do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid yea
we establish the law.
what shall we say then that Abraham our father as pertaining
to the flesh hath found?
for if Abraham were justified by works he hath whereof to
glory but not before God.
for what saith the scripture? Abraham believed God and it was
counted unto him for righteousness.
now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace
but of debt.
but to him that worketh not but believeth on him that
justifieth the ungodly his faith is counted for
righteousness.
even as David also describeth the blessedness of the man unto
whom God imputeth righteousness without works
saying blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven and
whose sins are covered.
blessed is the man to whom the lord will not impute Sin.
cometh this blessedness then upon the circumcision only or
upon the uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was
reckoned to Abraham for righteousness.
how was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision or in
uncircumcision? not in circumcision but in uncircumcision.
and he received the sign of circumcision a seal of the
righteousness of the faith which he had yet being
uncircumcised that he might be the father of all them that
believe though they be not circumcised that righteousness
might be imputed unto them also
and the father of circumcision to them who are not of the
circumcision only but who also walk in the steps of that
faith of our father Abraham which he had being yet
uncircumcised.
for the promise that he should be the heir of the world was
not to Abraham or to his seed through the law but through
the righteousness of faith.
for if they which are of the law be heirs faith is made void
and the promise made of none effect
because the law worketh wrath for where no law is there is
no transgression.
therefore it is of faith that it might be by grace to the
end the promise might be sure to all the seed not to that
only which is of the law but to that also which is of the
faith of Abraham who is the father of us all
 as it is written I have made thee a father of many nations
before him whom he believed even God who quickeneth the
dead and calleth those things which be not as though they
were.
who against hope believed in hope that he might become the
father of many nations according to that which was spoken so
shall thy seed be.
and being not weak in faith he considered not his own body
now dead when he was about an hundred years old Neither yet
the deadness of Sarah s womb
he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief but
was strong in faith giving glory to God
and being fully persuaded that what he had promised he was
able also to perform.
and therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.
now it was not written for his sake alone that it was imputed
to him
but for us also to whom it shall be imputed if we believe on
him that raised up Jesus our lord from the dead
who was delivered for our offences and was raised again for
our justification.
therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God
through our lord Jesus Christ
by whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein
we stand and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.
and not only so but we glory in tribulations also knowing
that tribulation worketh patience
and patience experience and experience hope
and hope maketh not ashamed because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the holy ghost which is given unto us.
for when we were yet without strength in due time Christ died
for the ungodly.
for scarcely for a righteous man will one die yet
peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die.
but God commendeth his love toward us in that while we were
yet sinners Christ died for us.
Much more then being now justified by his blood we shall be
saved from wrath through him.
for if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the
death of his son Much more being reconciled we shall be
saved by his life.
and not only so but we also joy in God through our lord Jesus
Christ by whom we have now received the atonement.
wherefore as by one man Sin entered into the world and death
by Sin and so death passed upon all men for that all have
sinned
 for until the law Sin was in the world but Sin is not
imputed when there is no law.
nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses even over them
that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam s
transgression who is the figure of him that was to come.
but not as the offence so also is the free gift. for if
through the offence of one many be dead Much more the grace
of God and the gift by grace which is by one man Jesus
Christ hath abounded unto many.
and not as it was by one that sinned so is the gift for the
judgment was by one to condemnation but the free gift is of
many offences unto justification.
for if by one man s offence death reigned by one Much more
they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of
righteousness shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ.
therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men
to condemnation even so by the righteousness of one the free
gift came upon all men unto justification of life.
for as by one man s disobedience many were made sinners so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
moreover the law entered that the offence might abound. but
where Sin abounded grace did Much more abound
that as Sin hath reigned unto death even so might grace reign
through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our
lord.
what shall we say then? shall we continue in Sin that grace
may abound?
God forbid. how shall we that are dead to Sin live any
longer therein?
know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ were baptized into his death?
therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
father even so we also should walk in newness of life.
for if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection
knowing this that our old man is crucified with him that the
body of Sin might be destroyed that henceforth we should not
serve Sin.
for he that is dead is freed from Sin.
now if we be dead with Christ we believe that we shall also
live with him
knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more
death hath no more dominion over him.
for in that he died he died unto Sin once but in that he
liveth he liveth unto God.
likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto Sin
but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our lord.
let not Sin therefore reign in your mortal body that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof.
Neither yield ye your members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto Sin but yield yourselves unto God as
those that are alive from the dead and your members as
instruments of righteousness unto God.
for Sin shall not have dominion over you for ye are not under
the law but under grace.
what then? shall we Sin because we are not under the law but
under grace? God forbid.
know ye not that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to
obey his servants ye are to whom ye obey whether of Sin unto
death or of obedience unto righteousness?
but God be thanked that ye were the servants of Sin but ye
have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was
delivered you.
being then made free from Sin ye became the servants of
righteousness.
I speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of
your flesh for as ye have yielded your members servants to
uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity even so now yield
your members servants to righteousness unto holiness.
for when ye were the servants of Sin ye were free from
righteousness.
what fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? for the end of those things is death.
but now being made free from Sin and become servants to God
ye have your fruit unto holiness and the end everlasting
life.
for the wages of Sin is death but the gift of God is eternal
life through Jesus Christ our lord.
know ye not brethren for I speak to them that know the
law how that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he
liveth?
for the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to her
husband so long as he liveth but if the husband be dead she
is loosed from the law of her husband.
so then if while her husband liveth she be married to
another man she shall be called an adulteress but if her
husband be dead she is free from that law so that she is no
adulteress though she be married to another man.
wherefore my brethren ye also are become dead to the law by
the body of Christ that ye should be married to another even
to him who is raised from the dead that we should bring forth
fruit unto God.
for when we were in the flesh the motions of sins which were
by the law did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto
death.
but now we are delivered from the law that being dead wherein
we were held that we should serve in newness of spirit and
not in the oldness of the letter.
what shall we say then? is the law Sin? God forbid. nay I had
not known Sin but by the law for I had not known lust
except the law had said thou shalt not covet.
but Sin taking occasion by the commandment wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence. for without the law Sin was dead.
for I was alive without the law once but when the commandment
came Sin revived and I died.
and the commandment which was ordained to life I found to be
unto death.
for Sin taking occasion by the commandment deceived me and
by it slew me.
wherefore the law is holy and the commandment holy and just
and good.
was then that which is good made death unto me? God forbid.
but Sin that it might appear Sin working death in me by that
which is good that Sin by the commandment might become
exceeding sinful.
for we know that the law is spiritual but I Am carnal sold
under Sin.
for that which I do I allow not for what I would that do I
not but what I hate that do I.
if then I do that which I would not I consent unto the law
that it is good.
now then it is no more I that do it but Sin that dwelleth in
me.
for I know that in me that is in my flesh dwelleth no good
thing for to will is present with me but how to perform that
which is good I find not.
for the good that I would I do not but the evil which I would
not that I do.
now if I do that I would not it is no more I that do it but
Sin that dwelleth in me.
I find then a law that when I would do good evil is present
with me.
for I delight in the law of God after the inward man
but I see another law in my members warring against the law
of my mind and bringing me into captivity to the law of Sin
which is in my members.
O wretched man that I Am who shall deliver me from the body
of this death?
I thank God through Jesus Christ our lord. so then with the
mind I myself serve the law of God but with the flesh the law
of Sin.
there is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus who walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit.
for the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me
free from the law of Sin and death.
for what the law could not do in that it was weak through the
flesh God sending his own son in the likeness of sinful
flesh and for Sin condemned Sin in the flesh
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us
who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.
for they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the
flesh but they that are after the spirit the things of the
spirit.
for to be carnally minded is death but to be spiritually
minded is life and peace.
because the carnal mind is enmity against God for it is not
subject to the law of God Neither indeed can be.
so then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.
but ye are not in the flesh but in the spirit if so be that
the spirit of God dwell in you. now if any man have not the
spirit of Christ he is none of his.
and if Christ be in you the body is dead because of Sin but
the spirit is life because of righteousness.
but if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead
dwell in you he that raised up Christ from the dead shall
also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that dwelleth in
you.
therefore brethren we are debtors not to the flesh to live
after the flesh.
for if ye live after the flesh ye shall die but if ye
through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body ye shall
live.
for as many as are led by the spirit of God they are the sons
of God.
for ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear
but ye have received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry
Abba father.
the spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are
the children of God
and if children then heirs heirs of God and joint-heirs
with Christ if so be that we suffer with him that we may be
also glorified together.
for I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed
in us.
for the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the
manifestation of the sons of God.
for the creature was made subject to vanity not willingly
but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope
because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
children of God.
for we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in
pain together until now.
and not only they but ourselves also which have the
firstfruits of the spirit even we ourselves groan within
ourselves waiting for the adoption to wit the redemption of
our body.
for we are saved by hope but hope that is seen is not hope
for what a man seeth why doth he yet hope for?
but if we hope for that we see not then do we with patience
wait for it.
likewise the spirit also helpeth our infirmities for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought but the spirit itself
maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered.
and he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of
the spirit because he maketh intercession for the saints
according to the will of God.
and we know that all things work together for good to them
that love God to them who are the called according to his
purpose.
for whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his son that he might be the
firstborn among many brethren.
moreover whom he did predestinate them he also called and
whom he called them he also justified and whom he justified
them he also glorified.
what shall we then say to these things? if God be for us who
can be against us?
he that spared not his own son but delivered him up for us
all how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
who shall lay any thing to the charge of God s elect? it is
God that justifieth.
who is he that condemneth? it is Christ that died yea rather
that is risen again who is even at the right hand of God who
also maketh intercession for us.
who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation or distress or persecution or famine or
nakedness or peril or sword?
as it is written for thy sake we are killed all the day long
we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
nay in all these things we are more than conquerors through
him that loved us.
for I Am persuaded that Neither death nor life nor angels
nor principalities nor powers nor things present nor things
to come
nor height nor depth nor any other creature shall be able
to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus
our lord.
I say the truth in Christ I lie not my conscience also
bearing me witness in the holy ghost
that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart.
for I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my
brethren my kinsmen according to the flesh
who are Israelites to whom pertaineth the adoption and the
glory and the covenants and the giving of the law and the
service of God and the promises
whose are the fathers and of whom as concerning the flesh
Christ came who is over all God blessed for ever. Amen.
not as though the word of God hath taken none effect. for they
are not all Israel which are of Israel
Neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they all
children but in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
that is they which are the children of the flesh these are
not the children of God but the children of the promise are
counted for the seed.
for this is the word of promise at this time will I come and
Sarah shall have a son.
and not only this but when Rebecca also had conceived by one
even by our father Isaac
 for the children being not yet born Neither having done any
good or evil that the purpose of God according to election
might stand not of works but of him that calleth
it was said unto her the elder shall serve the younger.
as it is written Jacob have I loved but Esau have I hated.
what shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid.
for he saith to Moses I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion.
so then it is not of him that willeth nor of him that
runneth but of God that sheweth mercy.
for the scripture saith unto Pharaoh even for this same
purpose have I raised thee up that I might shew my power in
thee and that my name might be declared throughout all the
earth.
therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy and whom
he will he hardeneth.
thou wilt say then unto me why doth he yet find fault? for
who hath resisted his will?
nay but O man who art thou that repliest against God? shall
the thing formed say to him that formed it why hast thou made
me thus?
hath not the potter power over the clay of the same lump to
make one vessel unto honour and another unto dishonour?
what if God willing to shew his wrath and to make his power
known endured with Much longsuffering the vessels of wrath
fitted to destruction
and that he might make known the Riches of his glory on the
vessels of mercy which he had afore prepared unto glory
even us whom he hath called not of the Jews only but also
of the Gentiles?
as he saith also in Osee I will call them my people which
were not my people and her beloved which was not beloved.
and it shall come to pass that in the place where it was said
unto them ye are not my people there shall they be called
the children of the living God.
Esaias also crieth concerning Israel though the number of the
children of Israel be as the sand of the sea a remnant shall
be saved
for he will finish the work and cut it short in
righteousness because a short work will the lord make upon
the earth.
and as Esaias said before except the lord of Sabaoth had left
us a seed we had been as Sodoma and been made like unto
Gomorrha.
what shall we say then? that the Gentiles which followed not
after righteousness have attained to righteousness even the
righteousness which is of faith.
but Israel which followed after the law of righteousness
hath not attained to the law of righteousness.
wherefore? because they sought it not by faith but as it were
by the works of the law. for they stumbled at that
stumblingstone
as it is written behold I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and
rock of offence and whosoever believeth on him shall not be
ashamed.
brethren my heart s desire and prayer to God for Israel is
that they might be saved.
for I bear them record that they have a zeal of God but not
according to knowledge.
for they being ignorant of God s righteousness and going
about to establish their own righteousness have not submitted
themselves unto the righteousness of God.
for Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every
one that believeth.
for Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law
that the man which doeth those things shall live by them.
but the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise
say not in thine heart who shall ascend into heaven? that
is to bring Christ down from above
or who shall descend into the deep? that is to bring up
Christ again from the dead.
but what saith it? the word is nigh thee even in thy mouth
and in thy heart that is the word of faith which we preach
that if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the lord Jesus and
shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the
dead thou shalt be saved.
for with the heart man believeth unto righteousness and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation.
for the scripture saith whosoever believeth on him shall not
be ashamed.
for there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek for
the same lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him.
for whosoever shall call upon the name of the lord shall be
saved.
how then shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have
not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?
and how shall they preach except they be sent? as it is
written how beautiful are the feet of them that preach the
gospel of peace and bring glad tidings of good things
but they have not all obeyed the gospel. for Esaias saith
lord who hath believed our report?
so then faith cometh by hearing and hearing by the word of
God.
but I say have they not heard? yes verily their sound went
into all the earth and their words unto the ends of the
world.
but I say did not Israel know? first Moses saith I will
provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people and by a
foolish nation I will anger you.
but Esaias is very bold and saith I was found of them that
sought me not I was made manifest unto them that asked not
after me.
but to Israel he saith all day long I have stretched forth my
hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.
I say then hath God cast away his people? God forbid. for I
also Am an Israelite of the seed of Abraham of the tribe of
Benjamin.
God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew. wot ye
not what the scripture saith of Elias? how he maketh
intercession to God against Israel saying
lord they have killed thy prophets and digged down thine
altars and I Am left alone and they seek my life.
but what saith the answer of God unto him? I have reserved to
myself seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee to the
image of Baal.
even so then at this present time also there is a remnant
according to the election of grace.
and if by grace then is it no more of works otherwise grace
is no more grace. but if it be of works then it is no more
grace otherwise work is no more work.
what then? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for
but the election hath obtained it and the rest were blinded.
 according as it is written God hath given them the spirit of
slumber eyes that they should not see and ears that they
should not hear unto this day.
and David saith let their table be made a snare and a trap
and a stumblingblock and a recompence unto them
let their eyes be darkened that they may not see and bow
down their back alway.
I say then have they stumbled that they should fall? God
forbid but rather through their fall salvation is come unto
the Gentiles for to provoke them to jealousy.
now if the fall of them be the Riches of the world and the
diminishing of them the Riches of the Gentiles how Much more
their fulness?
for I speak to you Gentiles inasmuch as I Am the apostle of
the Gentiles I magnify mine office
if by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my
flesh and might save some of them.
for if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the
world what shall the receiving of them be but life from the
dead?
for if the firstfruit be holy the lump is also holy and if
the root be holy so are the branches.
and if some of the branches be broken off and thou being a
wild olive tree wert graffed in among them and with them
partakest of the root and fatness of the olive tree
boast not against the branches. but if thou boast thou
bearest not the root but the root thee.
thou wilt say then the branches were broken off that I might
be graffed in.
well because of unbelief they were broken off and thou
standest by faith. be not highminded but fear
for if God spared not the natural branches take heed lest he
also spare not thee.
behold therefore the goodness and severity of God on them
which fell severity but toward thee goodness if thou
continue in his goodness otherwise thou also shalt be cut
off.
and they also if they abide not still in unbelief shall be
graffed in for God is able to graff them in again.
for if thou wert cut out of the olive tree which is wild by
nature and wert graffed contrary to nature into a good olive
tree how Much more shall these which be the natural
branches be graffed into their own olive tree?
for I would not brethren that ye should be ignorant of this
mystery lest ye should be wise in your own conceits that
blindness in part is happened to Israel until the fulness of
the Gentiles be come in.
and so all Israel shall be saved as it is written there
shall come out of Sion the deliverer and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob
for this is my covenant unto them when I shall take away
their sins.
as concerning the gospel they are enemies for your sakes but
as touching the election they are beloved for the father s
sakes.
for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.
for as ye in times past have not believed God yet have now
obtained mercy through their unbelief
even so have these also now not believed that through your
mercy they also may obtain mercy.
for God hath concluded them all in unbelief that he might
have mercy upon all.
O the depth of the Riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God how unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past
finding out
for who hath known the mind of the lord? or who hath been his
counsellor?
or who hath first given to him and it shall be recompensed
unto him again?
for of him and through him and to him are all things to
whom be glory for ever. Amen.
I beseech you therefore brethren by the mercies of God that
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice holy acceptable
unto God which is your reasonable service.
and be not conformed to this world but be ye transformed by
the renewing of your mind that ye may prove what is that
good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
for I say through the grace given unto me to every man that
is among you not to think of himself more highly than he
ought to think but to think soberly according as God hath
dealt to every man the measure of faith.
for as we have many members in one body and all members have
not the same office
so we being many are one body in Christ and every one
members one of another.
having then gifts differing according to the grace that is
given to us whether prophecy let us prophesy according to
the proportion of faith
or ministry let us wait on our ministering or he that
teacheth on teaching
or he that exhorteth on exhortation he that giveth let him
do it with simplicity he that ruleth with diligence he that
sheweth mercy with cheerfulness.
let love be without dissimulation. abhor that which is evil
cleave to that which is good.
be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love in
honour preferring one another
not slothful in business fervent in spirit serving the lord
rejoicing in hope patient in tribulation continuing instant
in prayer
distributing to the necessity of saints given to hospitality.
bless them which persecute you bless and curse not.
rejoice with them that do rejoice and weep with them that
weep.
be of the same mind one toward another. mind not high things
but condescend to men of low estate. be not wise in your own
conceits.
recompense to no man evil for evil. provide things honest in
the sight of all men.
if it be possible as Much as lieth in you live peaceably
with all men.
dearly beloved avenge not yourselves but rather give place
unto wrath for it is written vengeance is mine I will
repay saith the lord.
therefore if thine enemy hunger feed him if he thirst give
him drink for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on
his head.
be not overcome of evil but overcome evil with good.
let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. for there is
no power but of God the powers that be are ordained of God.
whosoever therefore resisteth the power resisteth the
ordinance of God and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation.
for rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil.
wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is
good and thou shalt have praise of the same
for he is the minister of God to thee for good. but if thou do
that which is evil be afraid for he beareth not the sword in
vain for he is the minister of God a revenger to execute
wrath upon him that doeth evil.
wherefore ye must needs be subject not only for wrath but
also for conscience sake.
for for this cause pay ye tribute also for they are God s
ministers attending continually upon this very thing.
render therefore to all their dues tribute to whom tribute is
due custom to whom custom fear to whom fear honour to whom
honour.
owe no man any thing but to love one another for he that
loveth another hath fulfilled the law.
for this thou shalt not commit adultery thou shalt not kill
thou shalt not steal thou shalt not bear false witness thou
shalt not covet and if there be any other commandment it is
briefly comprehended in this saying namely thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself.
love worketh no ill to his neighbour therefore love is the
fulfilling of the law.
and that knowing the time that now it is high time to awake
out of sleep for now is our salvation nearer than when we
believed.
the night is far spent the day is at hand let us therefore
cast off the works of darkness and let us put on the armour
of light.
let us walk honestly as in the day not in rioting and
drunkenness not in chambering and wantonness not in strife
and envying.
but put ye on the lord Jesus Christ and make not provision
for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof.
him that is weak in the faith receive ye but not to doubtful
disputations.
for one believeth that he may eat all things another who is
weak eateth herbs.
let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not and let
not him which eateth not judge him that eateth for God hath
received him.
who art thou that judgest another man s servant? to his own
Master he standeth or falleth. yea he shall be holden up for
God is able to make him stand.
one man esteemeth one day above another another esteemeth
every day alike. let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind.
he that regardeth the day regardeth it unto the lord and he
that regardeth not the day to the lord he doth not regard it.
he that eateth eateth to the lord for he giveth God thanks
and he that eateth not to the lord he eateth not and giveth
God thanks.
for none of us liveth to himself and no man dieth to himself.
for whether we live we live unto the lord and whether we
die we die unto the lord whether we live therefore or die
we are the lord s.
for to this end Christ both died and rose and revived that
he might be lord both of the dead and living.
but why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at
nought thy brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment
seat of Christ.
for it is written as I live saith the lord every knee shall
bow to me and every tongue shall confess to God.
so then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.
let us not therefore judge one another any more but judge
this rather that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion
to fall in his brother s way.
I know and Am persuaded by the lord Jesus that there is
nothing unclean of itself but to him that esteemeth any thing
to be unclean to him it is unclean.
but if thy brother be grieved with thy meat now walkest thou
not charitably. destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ
died.
let not then your good be evil spoken of
for the kingdom of God is not meat and drink but
righteousness and peace and joy in the holy ghost.
for he that in these things serveth Christ is acceptable to
God and approved of men.
let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace
and things wherewith one may edify another.
for meat destroy not the work of God. all things indeed are
pure but it is evil for that man who eateth with offence.
it is good Neither to eat flesh nor to drink wine nor any
thing whereby thy brother stumbleth or is offended or is
made weak.
hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God. happy is he
that condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth.
and he that doubteth is damned if he eat because he eateth
not of faith for whatsoever is not of faith is Sin.
we then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak and not to please ourselves.
let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to
edification.
for even Christ pleased not himself but as it is written
the reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me.
for whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for
our learning that we through patience and comfort of the
scriptures might have hope.
now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be
likeminded one toward another according to Christ Jesus
that ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God even the
father of our lord Jesus Christ.
wherefore receive ye one another as Christ also received us
to the glory of God.
now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision
for the truth of God to confirm the promises made unto the
fathers
and that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy as it
is written for this cause I will confess to thee among the
Gentiles and sing unto thy name.
and again he saith rejoice ye Gentiles with his people.
and again praise the lord all ye Gentiles and laud him all
ye people.
and again Esaias saith there shall be a root of Jesse and
he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles in him shall
the Gentiles trust.
now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing that ye may abound in hope through the power of
the holy ghost.
and I myself also Am persuaded of you my brethren that ye
also are full of goodness filled with all knowledge able
also to admonish one another.
nevertheless brethren I have written the more boldly unto
you in some sort as putting you in mind because of the grace
that is given to me of God
that I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles
ministering the gospel of God that the offering up of the
Gentiles might be acceptable being sanctified by the holy
ghost.
I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ in
those things which pertain to God.
for I will not dare to speak of any of those things which
Christ hath not wrought by me to make the Gentiles obedient
by word and deed
through Mighty signs and wonders by the power of the spirit
of God so that from Jerusalem and round about unto
Illyricum I have fully preached the gospel of Christ.
yea so have I strived to preach the gospel not where Christ
was named lest I should build upon another man s foundation
but as it is written to whom he was not spoken of they shall
see and they that have not heard shall understand.
for which cause also I have been Much hindered from coming to
you.
but now having no more place in these parts and having a
great desire these many years to come unto you
whensoever I take my journey into spain I will come to you
for I trust to see you in my journey and to be brought on my
way thitherward by you if first I be somewhat filled with
your company.
but now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the saints.
for it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a
certain contribution for the poor saints which are at
Jerusalem.
it hath pleased them verily and their debtors they are. for
if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual
things their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal
things.
when therefore I have performed this and have sealed to them
this fruit I will come by you into spain.
and I Am sure that when I come unto you I shall come in the
fulness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ.
now I beseech you brethren for the lord Jesus Christ s sake
and for the love of the spirit that ye strive together with
me in your prayers to God for me
that I may be delivered from them that do not believe in
Judaea and that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be
accepted of the saints
that I may come unto you with joy by the will of God and may
with you be refreshed.
now the God of peace be with you all. Amen.
I commend unto you Phebe our sister which is a servant of the
church which is at Cenchrea
that ye receive her in the lord as becometh saints and that
ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you for
she hath been a succourer of many and of myself also.
greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus
who have for my life laid down their own necks unto whom not
only I give thanks but also all the churches of the Gentiles.
likewise greet the church that is in their house. salute my
well-beloved Epaenetus who is the firstfruits of Achaia unto
Christ.
greet Mary who bestowed Much labour on us.
salute Andronicus and Junia my kinsmen and my
fellow-prisoners who are of note among the apostles who also
were in Christ before me.
greet Amplias my beloved in the lord.
salute Urbane our helper in Christ and Stachys my beloved.
salute Apelles approved in Christ. salute them which are of
Aristobulus household.
salute Herodion my kinsman. greet them that be of the
household of Narcissus which are in the lord.
salute Tryphena and Tryphosa who labour in the lord. salute
the beloved Persis which laboured Much in the lord.
salute Rufus chosen in the lord and his mother and mine.
salute Asyncritus Phlegon Hermas Patrobas Hermes and the
brethren which are with them.
salute Philologus and Julia Nereus and his sister and
Olympas and all the saints which are with them.
salute one another with an holy Kiss. the churches of Christ
salute you.
now I beseech you brethren Mark them which cause divisions
and offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned
and avoid them.
for they that are such serve not our lord Jesus Christ but
their own belly and by good words and fair speeches deceive
the hearts of the simple.
for your obedience is come abroad unto all men. I Am glad
therefore on your behalf but yet I would have you wise unto
that which is good and simple concerning evil.
and the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly. the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.
Timotheus my workfellow and Lucius and Jason and Sosipater
my kinsmen salute you.
I Tertius who wrote this epistle salute you in the lord.
Gaius mine host and of the whole church saluteth you.
Erastus the chamberlain of the city saluteth you and Quartus
a brother.
the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my
gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ according to the
revelation of the mystery which was kept secret since the
world began
but now is made manifest and by the scriptures of the
prophets according to the commandment of the everlasting God
made known to all nations for the obedience of faith
to God only wise be glory through Jesus Christ for ever.
Amen.
Paul called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will
of God and Sosthenes our brother
unto the church of God which is at Corinth to them that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus called to be saints with all that
in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our lord
both their s and our s
grace be unto you and peace from God our father and from
the lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God always on your behalf for the grace of God
which is given you by Jesus Christ
that in every thing ye are enriched by him in all utterance
and in all knowledge
even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you
so that ye come behind in no gift waiting for the coming of
our lord Jesus Christ
who shall also confirm you unto the end that ye may be
blameless in the day of our lord Jesus Christ.
God is faithful by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of
his son Jesus Christ our lord.
now I beseech you brethren by the name of our lord Jesus
Christ that ye all speak the same thing and that there be no
divisions among you but that ye be perfectly joined together
in the same mind and in the same judgment.
for it hath been declared unto me of you my brethren by them
which are of the house of Chloe that there are contentions
among you.
now this I say that every one of you saith I Am of Paul and
I of Apollos and I of Cephas and I of Christ.
is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye
baptized in the name of Paul?
I thank God that I baptized none of you but Crispus and
Gaius
lest any should say that I had baptized in mine own name.
and I baptized also the household of Stephanas besides I
know not whether I baptized any other.
for Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach the gospel
not with wisdom of words lest the cross of Christ should be
made of none effect.
for the preaching of the cross is to them that perish
foolishness but unto us which are saved it is the power of
God.
for it is written I will destroy the wisdom of the wise and
will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.
where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer
of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world?
for after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew
not God it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to
save them that believe.
for the Jews require a sign and the Greeks seek after wisdom
but we preach Christ crucified unto the Jews a
stumblingblock and unto the Greeks foolishness
but unto them which are called both Jews and Greeks Christ
the power of God and the wisdom of God.
because the foolishness of God is wiser than men and the
weakness of God is stronger than men.
for ye see your calling brethren how that not many wise men
after the flesh not many Mighty not many noble are called
but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise and God hath chosen the weak things of the
world to confound the things which are Mighty
and base things of the world and things which are despised
hath God chosen yea and things which are not to bring to
nought things that are
that no flesh should glory in his presence.
but of him are ye in Christ Jesus who of God is made unto us
wisdom and righteousness and sanctification and redemption
that according as it is written he that glorieth let him
glory in the lord.
and I brethren when I came to you came not with excellency
of speech or of wisdom declaring unto you the testimony of
God.
for I determined not to know any thing among you save Jesus
Christ and him crucified.
and I was with you in weakness and in fear and in Much
trembling.
and my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of
man s wisdom but in demonstration of the spirit and of power
that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men but in
the power of God.
howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect yet not
the wisdom of this world nor of the princes of this world
that come to nought
but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery even the hidden
wisdom which God ordained before the world unto our glory
which none of the princes of this world knew for had they
known it they would not have crucified the lord of glory.
but as it is written eye hath not seen nor ear heard
Neither have entered into the heart of man the things which
God hath prepared for them that love him.
but God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit for the
spirit searcheth all things yea the deep things of God.
for what man knoweth the things of a man save the spirit of
man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man
but the spirit of God.
now we have received not the spirit of the world but the
spirit which is of God that we might know the things that are
freely given to us of God.
which things also we speak not in the words which man s
wisdom teacheth but which the holy ghost teacheth comparing
spiritual things with spiritual.
but the natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of
God for they are foolishness unto him Neither can he know
them because they are spiritually discerned.
but he that is spiritual judgeth all things yet he himself is
judged of no man.
for who hath known the mind of the lord that he may instruct
him? but we have the mind of Christ.
and I brethren could not speak unto you as unto spiritual
but as unto carnal even as unto babes in Christ.
I have fed you with milk and not with meat for hitherto ye
were not able to bear it Neither yet now are ye able.
for ye are yet carnal for whereas there is among you envying
and strife and divisions are ye not carnal and walk as men?
for while one saith I Am of Paul and another I Am of
Apollos are ye not carnal?
who then is Paul and who is Apollos but ministers by whom ye
believed even as the lord gave to every man?
I have planted Apollos watered but God gave the increase.
so then Neither is he that planteth any thing Neither he that
watereth but God that giveth the increase.
now he that planteth and he that watereth are one and every
man shall receive his own reward according to his own labour.
for we are labourers together with God ye are God s
husbandry ye are God s building.
according to the grace of God which is given unto me as a
wise masterbuilder I have laid the foundation and another
buildeth thereon. but let every man take heed how he buildeth
thereupon.
for other foundation can no man lay than that is laid which
is Jesus Christ.
now if any man build upon this foundation gold Silver
precious stones wood hay stubble
every man s work shall be made manifest for the day shall
declare it because it shall be revealed by fire and the fire
shall try every man s work of what sort it is.
if any man s work abide which he hath built thereupon he
shall receive a reward.
if any man s work shall be burned he shall suffer loss but
he himself shall be saved yet so as by fire.
know ye not that ye are the temple of God and that the spirit
of God dwelleth in you?
if any man defile the temple of God him shall God destroy
for the temple of God is holy which temple ye are.
let no man deceive himself. if any man among you seemeth to be
wise in this world let him become a fool that he may be
wise.
for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. for it
is written he taketh the wise in their own craftiness.
and again the lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise that
they are vain.
therefore let no man glory in men. for all things are your s
whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or
death or things present or things to come all are your s
and ye are Christ s and Christ is God s.
let a man so account of us as of the ministers of Christ and
stewards of the mysteries of God.
moreover it is required in stewards that a man be found
faithful.
but with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged
of you or of man s judgment yea I judge not mine own self.
for I know nothing by myself yet Am I not hereby justified
but he that judgeth me is the lord.
therefore judge nothing before the time until the lord come
who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness
and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts and then
shall every man have praise of God.
and these things brethren I have in a figure transferred to
myself and to Apollos for your sakes that ye might learn in
us not to think of men above that which is written that no
one of you be puffed up for one against another.
for who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou
that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it why
dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?
now ye are full now ye are rich ye have reigned as kings
without us and I would to God ye did reign that we also
might reign with you.
for I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last as
it were appointed to death for we are made a spectacle unto
the world and to angels and to men.
we are fools for Christ s sake but ye are wise in Christ we
are weak but ye are strong ye are honourable but we are
despised.
even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst and
are naked and are buffeted and have no certain
dwellingplace
and labour working with our own hands being reviled we
bless being persecuted we suffer it
being defamed we intreat we are made as the filth of the
world and are the offscouring of all things unto this day.
I write not these things to shame you but as my beloved sons
I warn you.
for though ye have Ten thousand instructors in Christ yet
have ye not many fathers for in Christ Jesus I have begotten
you through the gospel.
wherefore I beseech you be ye followers of me.
for this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus who is my
beloved son and faithful in the lord who shall bring you
into remembrance of my ways which be in Christ as I teach
every where in every church.
now some are puffed up as though I would not come to you.
but I will come to you shortly if the lord will and will
know not the speech of them which are puffed up but the
power.
for the kingdom of God is not in word but in power.
what will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod or in love
and in the spirit of meekness?
it is reported commonly that there is fornication among you
and such fornication as is not so Much as named among the
Gentiles that one should have his father s wife.
and ye are puffed up and have not rather mourned that he
that hath done this deed might be taken away from among you.
for I verily as absent in body but present in spirit have
judged already as though I were present concerning him that
hath so done this deed
in the name of our lord Jesus Christ when ye are gathered
together and my spirit with the power of our lord Jesus
Christ
to deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the
flesh that the spirit may be saved in the day of the lord
Jesus.
your glorying is not good. know ye not that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump?
purge out therefore the old leaven that ye may be a new lump
as ye are unleavened. for even Christ our passover is
sacrificed for us
therefore let us keep the feast not with old leaven Neither
with the leaven of malice and wickedness but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
I wrote unto you in an epistle not to company with
fornicators
yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world or with
the covetous or extortioners or with idolaters for then
must ye needs go out of the world.
but now I have written unto you not to keep company if any
man that is called a brother be a fornicator or covetous or
an idolater or a railer or a drunkard or an extortioner
with such an one no not to eat.
for what have I to do to judge them also that are without? do
not ye judge them that are within?
but them that are without God judgeth. therefore put away from
among yourselves that wicked person.
dare any of you having a matter against another go to law
before the unjust and not before the saints?
do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if
the world shall be judged by you are ye unworthy to judge the
smallest matters?
know ye not that we shall judge angels? how Much more things
that pertain to this life?
if then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life
set them to judge who are least esteemed in the church.
I speak to your shame. is it so that there is not a wise man
among you? no not one that shall be able to judge between his
brethren?
but brother goeth to law with brother and that before the
unbelievers.
now therefore there is utterly a fault among you because ye
go to law one with another. why do ye not rather take wrong?
why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?
nay ye do wrong and defraud and that your brethren.
know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom
of God? be not deceived Neither fornicators nor idolaters
nor adulterers nor effeminate nor abusers of themselves with
mankind
nor thieves nor covetous nor drunkards nor revilers nor
extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God.
and such were some of you but ye are washed but ye are
sanctified but ye are justified in the name of the lord
Jesus and by the spirit of our God.
all things are lawful unto me but all things are not
expedient all things are lawful for me but I will not be
brought under the power of any.
meats for the belly and the belly for meats but God shall
destroy both it and them. now the body is not for fornication
but for the lord and the lord for the body.
and God hath both raised up the lord and will also raise up
us by his own power.
know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall
I then take the members of Christ and make them the members
of an harlot? God forbid.
what? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one
body? for two saith he shall be one flesh.
but he that is joined unto the lord is one spirit.
flee fornication. every Sin that a man doeth is without the
body but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his
own body.
what? know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy
ghost which is in you which ye have of God and ye are not
your own?
for ye are bought with a price therefore glorify God in your
body and in your spirit which are God s.
now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me it is good
for a man not to touch a woman.
nevertheless to avoid fornication let every man have his own
wife and let every woman have her own husband.
let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence and
likewise also the wife unto the husband.
the wife hath not power of her own body but the husband and
likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body but
the wife.
defraud ye not one the other except it be with consent for a
time that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer and
come together again that Satan tempt you not for your
incontinency.
but I speak this by permission and not of commandment.
for I would that all men were even as I myself. but every man
hath his proper gift of God one after this manner and
another after that.
I say therefore to the unmarried and widows it is good for
them if they abide even as I.
but if they cannot contain let them marry for it is better
to marry than to burn.
and unto the married I command yet not I but the lord let
not the wife depart from her husband
but and if she depart let her remain unmarried or be
reconciled to her husband and let not the husband put away
his wife.
but to the rest speak I not the lord if any brother hath a
wife that believeth not and she be pleased to dwell with him
let him not put her away.
and the woman which hath an husband that believeth not and if
he be pleased to dwell with her let her not leave him.
for the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband else were your
children unclean but now are they holy.
but if the unbelieving depart let him depart. a brother or a
sister is not under bondage in such cases but God hath called
us to peace.
for what knowest thou O wife whether thou shalt save thy
husband? or how knowest thou O man whether thou shalt save
thy wife?
but as God hath distributed to every man as the lord hath
called every one so let him walk. and so ordain I in all
churches.
is any man called being circumcised? let him not become
uncircumcised. is any called in uncircumcision? let him not be
circumcised.
circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing but
the keeping of the commandments of God.
let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.
art thou called being a servant? care not for it but if thou
mayest be made free use it rather.
for he that is called in the lord being a servant is the
lord s freeman likewise also he that is called being free
is Christ s servant.
ye are bought with a price be not ye the servants of men.
brethren let every man wherein he is called therein abide
with God.
now concerning virgins I have no commandment of the lord yet
I give my judgment as one that hath obtained mercy of the
lord to be faithful.
I suppose therefore that this is good for the present
distress I say that it is good for a man so to be.
art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. art thou
loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.
but and if thou marry thou hast not sinned and if a virgin
marry she hath not sinned. nevertheless such shall have
trouble in the flesh but I spare you.
but this I say brethren the time is short it remaineth
that both they that have wives be as though they had none
and they that weep as though they wept not and they that
rejoice as though they rejoiced not and they that buy as
though they possessed not
and they that use this world as not abusing it for the
fashion of this world passeth away.
but I would have you without carefulness. he that is unmarried
careth for the things that belong to the lord how he may
please the lord
but he that is married careth for the things that are of the
world how he may please his wife.
there is difference also between a wife and a virgin. the
unmarried woman careth for the things of the lord that she
may be holy both in body and in spirit but she that is
married careth for the things of the world how she may please
her husband.
and this I speak for your own profit not that I may cast a
snare upon you but for that which is comely and that ye may
attend upon the lord without distraction.
but if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward
his virgin if she pass the flower of her age and need so
require let him do what he will he sinneth not let them
marry.
nevertheless he that standeth stedfast in his heart having no
necessity but hath power over his own will and hath so
decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin doeth well.
so then he that giveth her in marriage doeth well but he that
giveth her not in marriage doeth better.
the wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth
but if her husband be dead she is at liberty to be married to
whom she will only in the lord.
but she is happier if she so abide after my judgment and I
think also that I have the spirit of God.
now as touching things offered unto idols we know that we all
have knowledge. knowledge puffeth up but charity edifieth.
and if any man think that he knoweth any thing he knoweth
nothing yet as he ought to know.
but if any man love God the same is known of him.
as concerning therefore the eating of those things that are
offered in sacrifice unto idols we know that an idol is
nothing in the world and that there is none other God but
one.
for though there be that are called gods whether in heaven or
in earth as there be gods many and lords many
but to us there is but one God the father of whom are all
things and we in him and one lord Jesus Christ by whom are
all things and we by him.
howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge for some
with conscience of the idol unto this hour eat it as a thing
offered unto an idol and their conscience being weak is
defiled.
but meat commendeth us not to God for Neither if we eat are
we the better Neither if we eat not are we the worse.
but take heed lest by any means this liberty of your s become
a stumblingblock to them that are weak.
for if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in
the idol s temple shall not the conscience of him which is
weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to
idols
and through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish for
whom Christ died?
but when ye Sin so against the brethren and wound their weak
conscience ye Sin against Christ.
wherefore if meat make my brother to offend I will eat no
flesh while the world standeth lest I make my brother to
offend.
Am I not an apostle? Am I not free? have I not seen Jesus
Christ our lord? are not ye my work in the lord?
if I be not an apostle unto others yet doubtless I Am to you
for the seal of mine apostleship are ye in the lord.
mine answer to them that do examine me is this
have we not power to eat and to drink?
have we not power to lead about a sister a wife as well as
other apostles and as the brethren of the lord and Cephas?
or I only and Barnabas have not we power to forbear working?
who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth
a vineyard and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who
feedeth a flock and eateth not of the milk of the flock?
say I these things as a man? or saith not the law the same
also?
for it is written in the law of Moses thou shalt not muzzle
the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. doth God take
care for oxen?
or saith he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no
doubt this is written that he that ploweth should plow in
hope and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of
his hope.
if we have sown unto you spiritual things is it a great thing
if we shall reap your carnal things?
if others be partakers of this power over you are not we
rather? nevertheless we have not used this power but suffer
all things lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ.
do ye not know that they which minister about holy things live
of the things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar
are partakers with the altar?
even so hath the lord ordained that they which preach the
gospel should live of the gospel.
but I have used none of these things Neither have I written
these things that it should be so done unto me for it were
better for me to die than that any man should make my
glorying void.
for though I preach the gospel I have nothing to glory of
for necessity is laid upon me yea woe is unto me if I
preach not the gospel
for if I do this thing willingly I have a reward but if
against my will a dispensation of the gospel is committed
unto me.
what is my reward then? verily that when I preach the gospel
I may make the gospel of Christ without charge that I abuse
not my power in the gospel.
for though I be free from all men yet have I made myself
servant unto all that I might gain the more.
and unto the Jews I became as a Jew that I might gain the
Jews to them that are under the law as under the law that I
might gain them that are under the law
to them that are without law as without law being not
without law to God but under the law to Christ that I might
gain them that are without law.
to the weak became I as weak that I might gain the weak I Am
made all things to all men that I might by all means save
some.
and this I do for the gospel s sake that I might be partaker
thereof with you.
know ye not that they which run in a race run all but one
receiveth the prize? so run that ye may obtain.
and every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in
all things. now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown but
we an incorruptible.
I therefore so run not as uncertainly so fight I not as one
that beateth the air
but I keep under my body and bring it into subjection lest
that by any means when I have preached to others I myself
should be a castaway.
moreover brethren I would not that ye should be ignorant
how that all our fathers were under the cloud and all passed
through the sea
and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea
and did all eat the same spiritual meat
and did all drink the same spiritual drink for they drank of
that spiritual rock that followed them and that rock was
Christ.
but with many of them God was not well pleased for they were
overthrown in the wilderness.
now these things were our examples to the intent we should
not lust after evil things as they also lusted.
Neither be ye idolaters as were some of them as it is
written the people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to
play.
Neither let us commit fornication as some of them committed
and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted and
were destroyed of serpents.
Neither murmur ye as some of them also murmured and were
destroyed of the destroyer.
now all these things happened unto them for ensamples and
they are written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the
world are come.
wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he
fall.
there hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to
man but God is faithful who will not suffer you to be
tempted above that ye are able but will with the temptation
also make a way to escape that ye may be able to bear it.
wherefore my dearly beloved flee from idolatry.
I speak as to wise men judge ye what I say.
the cup of blessing which we bless is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? the bread which we break is it not the
communion of the body of Christ?
for we being many are one bread and one body for we are all
partakers of that one bread.
behold Israel after the flesh are not they which eat of the
sacrifices partakers of the altar?
what say I then? that the idol is any thing or that which is
offered in sacrifice to idols is any thing?
but I say that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice they
sacrifice to devils and not to God and I would not that ye
should have fellowship with devils.
ye cannot drink the cup of the lord and the cup of devils ye
cannot be partakers of the lord s table and of the table of
devils.
do we provoke the lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?
all things are lawful for me but all things are not
expedient all things are lawful for me but all things edify
not.
let no man seek his own but every man another s wealth.
whatsoever is sold in the shambles that eat asking no
question for conscience sake
for the earth is the lord s and the fulness thereof.
if any of them that believe not bid you to a feast and ye be
disposed to go whatsoever is set before you eat asking no
question for conscience sake.
but if any man say unto you this is offered in sacrifice unto
idols eat not for his sake that shewed it and for conscience
sake for the earth is the lord s and the fulness thereof
conscience I say not thine own but of the other for why is
my liberty judged of another man s conscience?
for if I by grace be a partaker why Am I evil spoken of for
that for which I give thanks?
whether therefore ye eat or drink or whatsoever ye do do
all to the glory of God.
give none offence Neither to the Jews nor to the Gentiles
nor to the church of God
even as I please all men in all things not seeking mine own
profit but the profit of many that they may be saved.
be ye followers of me even as I also Am of Christ.
now I praise you brethren that ye remember me in all things
and keep the ordinances as I delivered them to you.
but I would have you know that the head of every man is
Christ and the head of the woman is the man and the head of
Christ is God.
every man praying or prophesying having his head covered
dishonoureth his head.
but every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head
uncovered dishonoureth her head for that is even all one as
if she were shaven.
for if the woman be not covered let her also be shorn but if
it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven let her be
covered.
for a man indeed ought not to cover his head forasmuch as he
is the image and glory of God but the woman is the glory of
the man.
for the man is not of the woman but the woman of the man.
Neither was the man created for the woman but the woman for
the man.
for this cause ought the woman to have power on her head
because of the angels.
nevertheless Neither is the man without the woman Neither the
woman without the man in the lord.
for as the woman is of the man even so is the man also by the
woman but all things of God.
judge in yourselves is it comely that a woman pray unto God
uncovered?
doth not even nature itself teach you that if a man have
long hair it is a shame unto him?
but if a woman have long hair it is a glory to her for her
hair is given her for a covering.
but if any man seem to be contentious we have no such custom
Neither the churches of God.
now in this that I declare unto you I praise you not that ye
come together not for the better but for the worse.
for first of all when ye come together in the church I hear
that there be divisions among you and I partly believe it.
for there must be also heresies among you that they which are
approved may be made manifest among you.
when ye come together therefore into one place this is not to
eat the lord s supper.
for in eating every one taketh before other his own supper
and one is hungry and another is drunken.
what? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye
the church of God and shame them that have not? what shall I
say to you? shall I praise you in this? I praise you not.
for I have received of the lord that which also I delivered
unto you that the lord Jesus the same night in which he was
betrayed took bread
and when he had given thanks he brake it and said take
eat this is my body which is broken for you this do in
remembrance of me.
after the same manner also he took the cup when he had
supped saying this cup is the new testament in my blood
this do ye as oft as ye drink it in remembrance of me.
for as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup ye do
shew the lord s death till he come.
wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup
of the lord unworthily shall be guilty of the body and blood
of the lord.
but let a man examine himself and so let him eat of that
bread and drink of that cup.
for he that eateth and drinketh unworthily eateth and
drinketh damnation to himself not discerning the lord s body.
for this cause many are weak and sickly among you and many
sleep.
for if we would judge ourselves we should not be judged.
but when we are judged we are chastened of the lord that we
should not be condemned with the world.
wherefore my brethren when ye come together to eat tarry
one for another.
and if any man hunger let him eat at home that ye come not
together unto condemnation. and the rest will I set in order
when I come.
now concerning spiritual gifts brethren I would not have you
ignorant.
ye know that ye were Gentiles carried away unto these dumb
idols even as ye were led.
wherefore I give you to understand that no man speaking by
the spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed and that no man can
say that Jesus is the lord but by the holy ghost.
now there are diversities of gifts but the same spirit.
and there are differences of administrations but the same
lord.
and there are diversities of operations but it is the same
God which worketh all in all.
but the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to
profit withal.
for to one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom to
another the word of knowledge by the same spirit
to another faith by the same spirit to another the gifts of
healing by the same spirit
to another the working of miracles to another prophecy to
another discerning of spirits to another divers kinds of
tongues to another the interpretation of tongues
but all these worketh that one and the selfsame spirit
dividing to every man severally as he will.
for as the body is one and hath many members and all the
members of that one body being many are one body so also is
Christ.
for by one spirit are we all baptized into one body whether
we be Jews or Gentiles whether we be bond or free and have
been all made to drink into one spirit.
for the body is not one member but many.
if the foot shall say because I Am not the hand I Am not of
the body is it therefore not of the body?
and if the ear shall say because I Am not the eye I Am not
of the body is it therefore not of the body?
if the whole body were an eye where were the hearing? if the
whole were hearing where were the smelling?
but now hath God set the members every one of them in the
body as it hath pleased him.
and if they were all one member where were the body?
but now are they many members yet but one body.
and the eye cannot say unto the hand I have no need of thee
nor again the head to the feet I have no need of you.
nay Much more those members of the body which seem to be
more feeble are necessary
and those members of the body which we think to be less
honourable upon these we bestow more abundant honour and our
uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness.
for our comely parts have no need but God hath tempered the
body together having given more abundant honour to that part
which lacked.
that there should be no schism in the body but that the
members should have the same care one for another.
and whether one member suffer all the members suffer with it
or one member be honoured all the members rejoice with it.
now ye are the body of Christ and members in particular.
and God hath set some in the church first apostles
secondarily prophets thirdly teachers after that miracles
then gifts of healings helps governments diversities of
tongues.
are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all
workers of miracles?
have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do
all interpret?
but covet earnestly the best gifts and yet shew I unto you a
more excellent way.
though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels and have
not charity I Am become as sounding brass or a tinkling
cymbal.
and though I have the gift of prophecy and understand all
mysteries and all knowledge and though I have all faith so
that I could remove mountains and have not charity I Am
nothing.
and though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor and though
I give my body to be burned and have not charity it
profiteth me nothing.
charity suffereth long and is kind charity envieth not
charity vaunteth not itself is not puffed up
doth not behave itself unseemly seeketh not her own is not
easily provoked thinketh no evil
rejoiceth not in iniquity but rejoiceth in the truth
beareth all things believeth all things hopeth all things
endureth all things.
charity never faileth but whether there be prophecies they
shall fail whether there be tongues they shall cease
whether there be knowledge it shall vanish away.
for we know in part and we prophesy in part.
but when that which is perfect is come then that which is in
part shall be done away.
when I was a child I spake as a child I understood as a
child I thought as a child but when I became a man I put
away childish things.
for now we see through a glass darkly but then face to face
now I know in part but then shall I know even as also I Am
known.
and now abideth faith hope charity these three but the
greatest of these is charity.
follow after charity and desire spiritual gifts but rather
that ye may prophesy.
for he that speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto
men but unto God for no man understandeth him howbeit in
the spirit he speaketh mysteries.
but he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification and
exhortation and comfort.
he that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself but he
that prophesieth edifieth the church.
I would that ye all spake with tongues but rather that ye
prophesied for greater is he that prophesieth than he that
speaketh with tongues except he interpret that the church
may receive edifying.
now brethren if I come unto you speaking with tongues what
shall I profit you except I shall speak to you either by
revelation or by knowledge or by prophesying or by
doctrine?
and even things without life giving sound whether pipe or
harp except they give a distinction in the sounds how shall
it be known what is piped or harped?
for if the trumpet give an uncertain sound who shall prepare
himself to the battle?
so likewise ye except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be
understood how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall
speak into the air.
there are it may be so many kinds of voices in the world
and none of them is without signification.
therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice I shall be
unto him that speaketh a Barbarian and he that speaketh shall
be a Barbarian unto me.
even so ye forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts
seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the church.
wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue pray that
he may interpret.
for if I pray in an unknown tongue my spirit prayeth but my
understanding is unfruitful.
what is it then? I will pray with the spirit and I will pray
with the understanding also I will sing with the spirit and
I will sing with the understanding also.
else when thou shalt bless with the spirit how shall he that
occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of
thanks seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest?
for thou verily givest thanks well but the other is not
edified.
I thank my God I speak with tongues more than ye all
yet in the church I had rather speak five words with my
understanding that by my voice I might teach others also
than Ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.
brethren be not children in understanding howbeit in malice
be ye children but in understanding be men.
in the law it is written with men of other tongues and other
lips will I speak unto this people and yet for all that will
they not hear me saith the lord.
wherefore tongues are for a sign not to them that believe
but to them that believe not but prophesying serveth not for
them that believe not but for them which believe.
if therefore the whole church be come together into one place
and all speak with tongues and there come in those that are
unlearned or unbelievers will they not say that ye are mad?
but if all prophesy and there come in one that believeth not
or one unlearned he is convinced of all he is judged of all
and thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest and so
falling down on his face he will worship God and report that
God is in you of a truth.
how is it then brethren? when ye come together every one of
you hath a psalm hath a doctrine hath a tongue hath a
revelation hath an interpretation. let all things be done
unto edifying.
if any man speak in an unknown tongue let it be by two or at
the most by three and that by course and let one interpret.
but if there be no interpreter let him keep silence in the
church and let him speak to himself and to God.
let the prophets speak two or three and let the other judge.
if any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by let the
first hold his peace.
for ye may all prophesy one by one that all may learn and
all may be comforted.
and the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.
for God is not the author of confusion but of peace as in
all churches of the saints.
let your women keep silence in the churches for it is not
permitted unto them to speak but they are commanded to be
under obedience as also saith the law.
and if they will learn any thing let them ask their husbands
at home for it is a shame for women to speak in the church.
what? came the word of God out from you? or came it unto you
only?
if any man think himself to be a prophet or spiritual let
him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the
commandments of the lord.
but if any man be ignorant let him be ignorant.
wherefore brethren covet to prophesy and forbid not to
speak with tongues.
let all things be done decently and in order.
moreover brethren I declare unto you the gospel which I
preached unto you which also ye have received and wherein ye
stand
by which also ye are saved if ye keep in memory what I
preached unto you unless ye have believed in vain.
for I delivered unto you first of all that which I also
received how that Christ died for our sins according to the
scriptures
and that he was buried and that he rose again the third day
according to the scriptures
and that he was seen of Cephas then of the twelve
after that he was seen of above five hundred brethren at
once of whom the greater part remain unto this present but
some are fallen asleep.
after that he was seen of James then of all the apostles.
and last of all he was seen of me also as of one born out of
due time.
for I Am the least of the apostles that Am not meet to be
called an apostle because I persecuted the church of God.
but by the grace of God I Am what I Am and his grace which
was bestowed upon me was not in vain but I laboured more
abundantly than they all yet not I but the grace of God
which was with me.
therefore whether it were I or they so we preach and so ye
believed.
now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead how say
some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?
but if there be no resurrection of the dead then is Christ
not risen
and if Christ be not risen then is our preaching vain and
your faith is also vain.
yea and we are found false witnesses of God because we have
testified of God that he raised up Christ whom he raised not
up if so be that the dead rise not.
for if the dead rise not then is not Christ raised
and if Christ be not raised your faith is vain ye are yet in
your sins.
then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.
if in this life only we have hope in Christ we are of all men
most miserable.
but now is Christ risen from the dead and become the
firstfruits of them that slept.
for since by man came death by man came also the resurrection
of the dead.
for as in Adam all die even so in Christ shall all be made
alive.
but every man in his own order Christ the firstfruits
afterward they that are Christ s at his coming.
then cometh the end when he shall have delivered up the
kingdom to God even the father when he shall have put down
all rule and all authority and power.
for he must reign till he hath put all enemies under his
feet.
the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.
for he hath put all things under his feet. but when he saith
all things are put under him it is manifest that he is
excepted which did put all things under him.
and when all things shall be subdued unto him then shall the
son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under
him that God may be all in all.
else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead if
the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the
dead?
and why stand we in jeopardy every hour?
I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our
lord I die daily.
if after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus what advantageth it me if the dead rise not? let us
eat and drink for to morrow we die.
be not deceived evil communications corrupt good manners.
awake to righteousness and Sin not for some have not the
knowledge of God I speak this to your shame.
but some man will say how are the dead raised up? and with
what body do they come?
thou fool that which thou sowest is not quickened except it
die
and that which thou sowest thou sowest not that body that
shall be but bare grain it may chance of wheat or of some
other grain
but God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him and to every
seed his own body.
all flesh is not the same flesh but there is one kind of
flesh of men another flesh of beasts another of fishes and
another of birds.
there are also celestial bodies and bodies terrestrial but
the glory of the celestial is one and the glory of the
terrestrial is another.
there is one glory of the sun and another glory of the moon
and another glory of the stars for one star differeth from
another star in glory.
so also is the resurrection of the dead. it is sown in
corruption it is raised in incorruption
it is sown in dishonour it is raised in glory it is sown in
weakness it is raised in power
it is sown a natural body it is raised a spiritual body.
there is a natural body and there is a spiritual body.
and so it is written the first man Adam was made a living
soul the last Adam was made a quickening spirit.
howbeit that was not first which is spiritual but that which
is natural and afterward that which is spiritual.
the first man is of the earth earthy the second man is the
lord from heaven.
as is the earthy such are they also that are earthy and as
is the heavenly such are they also that are heavenly.
and as we have borne the image of the earthy we shall also
bear the image of the heavenly.
now this I say brethren that flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God Neither doth corruption inherit
incorruption.
behold I shew you a mystery we shall not all sleep but we
shall all be changed
in a moment in the twinkling of an eye at the last trump
for the trumpet shall sound and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible and we shall be changed.
for this corruptible must put on incorruption and this mortal
must put on immortality.
so when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption and
this mortal shall have put on immortality then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written death is swallowed
up in victory.
O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory?
the sting of death is Sin and the strength of Sin is the law.
but thanks be to God which giveth us the victory through our
lord Jesus Christ.
therefore my beloved brethren be ye stedfast unmoveable
always abounding in the work of the lord forasmuch as ye know
that your labour is not in vain in the lord.
now concerning the collection for the saints as I have given
order to the churches of Galatia even so do ye.
upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him
in store as God hath prospered him that there be no
gatherings when I come.
and when I come whomsoever ye shall approve by your letters
them will I send to bring your liberality unto Jerusalem.
and if it be meet that I go also they shall go with me.
now I will come unto you when I shall pass through Macedonia
for I do pass through Macedonia.
and it may be that I will abide yea and winter with you
that ye may bring me on my journey whithersoever I go.
for I will not see you now by the way but I trust to tarry a
while with you if the lord permit.
but I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost.
for a great door and effectual is opened unto me and there
are many adversaries.
now if Timotheus come see that he may be with you without
fear for he worketh the work of the lord as I also do.
let no man therefore despise him but conduct him forth in
peace that he may come unto me for I look for him with the
brethren.
as touching our brother Apollos I greatly desired him to come
unto you with the brethren but his will was not at all to
come at this time but he will come when he shall have
convenient time.
watch ye stand fast in the faith quit you like men be
strong.
let all your things be done with charity.
I beseech you brethren ye know the house of Stephanas that
it is the firstfruits of Achaia and that they have addicted
themselves to the ministry of the saints
that ye submit yourselves unto such and to every one that
helpeth with us and laboureth.
I Am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and
Achaicus for that which was lacking on your part they have
supplied.
for they have refreshed my spirit and your s therefore
acknowledge ye them that are such.
the churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute
you Much in the lord with the church that is in their house.
all the brethren greet you. greet ye one another with an holy
Kiss.
the salutation of me Paul with mine own hand.
if any man love not the lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema
Maranatha.
the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you.
my love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.
Paul an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God and
Timothy our brother unto the church of God which is at
Corinth with all the saints which are in all Achaia
grace be to you and peace from God our father and from the
lord Jesus Christ.
blessed be God even the father of our lord Jesus Christ the
father of mercies and the God of all comfort
who comforteth us in all our tribulation that we may be able
to comfort them which are in any trouble by the comfort
wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God.
for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us so our
consolation also aboundeth by Christ.
and whether we be afflicted it is for your consolation and
salvation which is effectual in the enduring of the same
sufferings which we also suffer or whether we be comforted
it is for your consolation and salvation.
and our hope of you is stedfast knowing that as ye are
partakers of the sufferings so shall ye be also of the
consolation.
for we would not brethren have you ignorant of our trouble
which came to us in Asia that we were pressed out of measure
above strength insomuch that we despaired even of life
but we had the sentence of death in ourselves that we should
not trust in ourselves but in God which raiseth the dead
who delivered us from so great a death and doth deliver in
whom we trust that he will yet deliver us
ye also helping together by prayer for us that for the gift
bestowed upon us by the means of many persons thanks may be
given by many on our behalf.
for our rejoicing is this the testimony of our conscience
that in simplicity and godly sincerity not with fleshly
wisdom but by the grace of God we have had our conversation
in the world and more abundantly to you-ward.
for we write none other things unto you than what ye read or
acknowledge and I trust ye shall acknowledge even to the end
as also ye have acknowledged us in part that we are your
rejoicing even as ye also are our s in the day of the lord
Jesus.
and in this confidence I was minded to come unto you before
that ye might have a second benefit
and to pass by you into Macedonia and to come again out of
Macedonia unto you and of you to be brought on my way toward
Judaea.
when I therefore was thus minded did I use lightness? or the
things that I purpose do I purpose according to the flesh
that with me there should be yea yea and nay nay?
but as God is true our word toward you was not yea and nay.
for the son of God Jesus Christ who was preached among you
by us even by me and Silvanus and Timotheus was not yea and
nay but in him was yea.
for all the promises of God in him are yea and in him Amen
unto the glory of God by us.
now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ and hath
anointed us is God
who hath also sealed us and given the earnest of the spirit
in our hearts.
moreover I call God for a record upon my soul that to spare
you I came not as yet unto Corinth.
not for that we have dominion over your faith but are helpers
of your joy for by faith ye stand.
but I determined this with myself that I would not come again
to you in heaviness.
for if I make you sorry who is he then that maketh me glad
but the same which is made sorry by me?
and I wrote this same unto you lest when I came I should
have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice having
confidence in you all that my joy is the joy of you all.
for out of Much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto
you with many tears not that ye should be grieved but that
ye might know the love which I have more abundantly unto you.
but if any have caused grief he hath not grieved me but in
part that I may not overcharge you all.
sufficient to such a man is this punishment which was
inflicted of many.
so that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him and
comfort him lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow.
wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward
him.
for to this end also did I write that I might know the proof
of you whether ye be obedient in all things.
to whom ye forgive any thing I forgive also for if I forgave
any thing to whom I forgave it for your sakes forgave I it
in the person of Christ
lest Satan should get an advantage of us for we are not
ignorant of his devices.
furthermore when I came to Troas to preach Christ s gospel
and a door was opened unto me of the lord
I had no rest in my spirit because I found not Titus my
brother but taking my leave of them I went from thence into
Macedonia.
now thanks be unto God which always causeth us to triumph in
Christ and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us
in every place.
for we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ in them that are
saved and in them that perish
to the one we are the savour of death unto death and to the
other the savour of life unto life. and who is sufficient for
these things?
for we are not as many which corrupt the word of God but as
of sincerity but as of God in the sight of God speak we in
Christ.
do we begin again to commend ourselves? or need we as some
others epistles of commendation to you or letters of
commendation from you?
ye are our epistle written in our hearts known and read of
all men
forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of
Christ ministered by us written not with ink but with the
spirit of the living God not in tables of stone but in
fleshy tables of the heart.
and such trust have we through Christ to God-ward
not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as
of ourselves but our sufficiency is of God
who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament not
of the letter but of the spirit for the letter killeth but
the spirit giveth life.
but if the ministration of death written and engraven in
stones was glorious so that the children of Israel could not
stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his
countenance which glory was to be done away
how shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather
glorious?
for if the ministration of condemnation be glory Much more
doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory.
for even that which was made glorious had no glory in this
respect by reason of the glory that excelleth.
for if that which is done away was glorious Much more that
which remaineth is glorious.
seeing then that we have such hope we use great plainness of
speech
and not as Moses which put a vail over his face that the
children of Israel could not stedfastly look to the end of
that which is abolished
but their minds were blinded for until this day remaineth the
same vail untaken away in the reading of the old testament
which vail is done away in Christ.
but even unto this day when Moses is read the vail is upon
their heart.
nevertheless when it shall turn to the lord the vail shall be
taken away.
now the lord is that spirit and where the spirit of the lord
is there is liberty.
but we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory
of the lord are changed into the same image from glory to
glory even as by the spirit of the lord.
therefore seeing we have this ministry as we have received
mercy we faint not
but have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty not
walking in craftiness nor handling the word of God
deceitfully but by manifestation of the truth commending
ourselves to every man s conscience in the sight of God.
but if our gospel be hid it is hid to them that are lost
in whom the God of this world hath blinded the minds of them
which believe not lest the light of the glorious gospel of
Christ who is the image of God should shine unto them.
for we preach not ourselves but Christ Jesus the lord and
ourselves your servants for Jesus sake.
for God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness
hath shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
but we have this treasure in earthen vessels that the
excellency of the power may be of God and not of us.
we are troubled on every side yet not distressed we are
perplexed but not in despair
persecuted but not forsaken cast down but not destroyed
always bearing about in the body the dying of the lord Jesus
that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our
body.
for we which live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus
sake that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in
our mortal flesh.
so then death worketh in us but life in you.
we having the same spirit of faith according as it is
written I believed and therefore have I spoken we also
believe and therefore speak
knowing that he which raised up the lord Jesus shall raise up
us also by Jesus and shall present us with you.
for all things are for your sakes that the abundant grace
might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of
God.
for which cause we faint not but though our outward man
perish yet the inward man is renewed day by day.
for our light affliction which is but for a moment worketh
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory
while we look not at the things which are seen but at the
things which are not seen for the things which are seen are
temporal but the things which are not seen are eternal.
for we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved we have a building of God an house not made with
hands eternal in the heavens.
for in this we groan earnestly desiring to be clothed upon
with our house which is from heaven
if so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked.
for we that are in this tabernacle do groan being burdened
not for that we would be unclothed but clothed upon that
mortality might be swallowed up of life.
now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God who
also hath given unto us the earnest of the spirit.
therefore we are always confident knowing that whilst we are
at home in the body we are absent from the lord
 for we walk by faith not by sight
we are confident I say and willing rather to be absent from
the body and to be present with the lord.
wherefore we labour that whether present or absent we may
be accepted of him.
for we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ
that every one may receive the things done in his body
according to that he hath done whether it be good or bad.
knowing therefore the terror of the lord we persuade men but
we are made manifest unto God and I trust also are made
manifest in your consciences.
for we commend not ourselves again unto you but give you
occasion to glory on our behalf that ye may have somewhat to
answer them which glory in appearance and not in heart.
for whether we be beside ourselves it is to God or whether
we be sober it is for your cause.
for the love of Christ constraineth us because we thus judge
that if one died for all then were all dead
and that he died for all that they which live should not
henceforth live unto themselves but unto him which died for
them and rose again.
wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh yea
though we have known Christ after the flesh yet now
henceforth know we him no more.
therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature old
things are passed away behold all things are become new.
and all things are of God who hath reconciled us to himself
by Jesus Christ and hath given to us the ministry of
reconciliation
to wit that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself not imputing their trespasses unto them and hath
committed unto us the word of reconciliation.
now then we are ambassadors for Christ as though God did
beseech you by us we pray you in Christ s stead be ye
reconciled to God.
for he hath made him to be Sin for us who knew no Sin that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
we then as workers together with him beseech you also that
ye receive not the grace of God in vain.
 for he saith I have heard thee in a time accepted and in
the day of salvation have I succoured thee behold now is the
accepted time behold now is the day of salvation.
giving no offence in any thing that the ministry be not
blamed
but in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God
in Much patience in afflictions in necessities in
distresses
in stripes in imprisonments in tumults in labours in
watchings in fastings
by pureness by knowledge by longsuffering by kindness by
the holy ghost by love unfeigned
by the word of truth by the power of God by the armour of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left
by honour and dishonour by evil report and good report as
deceivers and yet true
as unknown and yet well known as dying and behold we
live as chastened and not killed
as sorrowful yet alway rejoicing as poor yet making many
rich as having nothing and yet possessing all things.
O ye Corinthians our mouth is open unto you our heart is
enlarged.
ye are not straitened in us but ye are straitened in your own
bowels.
now for a recompence in the same I speak as unto my
children be ye also enlarged.
be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers for what
fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what
communion hath light with darkness?
and what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he
that believeth with an infidel?
and what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? for ye
are the temple of the living God as God hath said I will
dwell in them and walk in them and I will be their God and
they shall be my people.
wherefore come out from among them and be ye separate saith
the lord and touch not the unclean thing and I will receive
you.
and will be a father unto you and ye shall be my sons and
daughters saith the lord almighty.
having therefore these promises dearly beloved let us
cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit
perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
receive us we have wronged no man we have corrupted no man
we have defrauded no man.
I speak not this to condemn you for I have said before that
ye are in our hearts to die and live with you.
great is my boldness of speech toward you great is my
glorying of you I Am filled with comfort I Am exceeding
joyful in all our tribulation.
for when we were come into Macedonia our flesh had no rest
but we were troubled on every side without were fightings
within were fears.
nevertheless God that comforteth those that are cast down
comforted us by the coming of Titus
and not by his coming only but by the consolation wherewith
he was comforted in you when he told us your earnest desire
your mourning your fervent mind toward me so that I rejoiced
the more.
for though I made you sorry with a letter I do not repent
though I did repent for I perceive that the same epistle hath
made you sorry though it were but for a season.
now I rejoice not that ye were made sorry but that ye
sorrowed to repentance for ye were made sorry after a godly
manner that ye might receive damage by us in nothing.
for godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be
repented of but the sorrow of the world worketh death.
for behold this selfsame thing that ye sorrowed after a godly
sort what carefulness it wrought in you yea what clearing
of yourselves yea what indignation yea what fear yea
what vehement desire yea what zeal yea what revenge in
all things ye have approved yourselves to be clear in this
matter.
wherefore though I wrote unto you I did it not for his cause
that had done the wrong nor for his cause that suffered
wrong but that our care for you in the sight of God might
appear unto you.
therefore we were comforted in your comfort yea and
exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus because
his spirit was refreshed by you all.
for if I have boasted any thing to him of you I Am not
ashamed but as we spake all things to you in truth even so
our boasting which I made before Titus is found a truth.
and his inward affection is more abundant toward you whilst
he remembereth the obedience of you all how with fear and
trembling ye received him.
I rejoice therefore that I have confidence in you in all
things.
moreover brethren we do you to wit of the grace of God
bestowed on the churches of Macedonia
how that in a great trial of affliction the abundance of their
joy and their deep poverty abounded unto the Riches of their
liberality.
for to their power I bear record yea and beyond their power
they were willing of themselves
praying us with Much intreaty that we would receive the gift
and take upon us the fellowship of the ministering to the
saints.
and this they did not as we hoped but first gave their own
selves to the lord and unto us by the will of God.
insomuch that we desired Titus that as he had begun so he
would also finish in you the same grace also.
therefore as ye abound in every thing in faith and
utterance and knowledge and in all diligence and in your
love to us see that ye abound in this grace also.
I speak not by commandment but by occasion of the forwardness
of others and to prove the sincerity of your love.
for ye know the grace of our lord Jesus Christ that though
he was rich yet for your sakes he became poor that ye
through his poverty might be rich.
and herein I give my advice for this is expedient for you
who have begun before not only to do but also to be forward
a year ago.
now therefore perform the doing of it that as there was a
readiness to will so there may be a performance also out of
that which ye have.
for if there be first a willing mind it is accepted according
to that a man hath and not according to that he hath not.
for I mean not that other men be eased and ye burdened
but by an equality that now at this time your abundance may
be a supply for their want that their abundance also may be a
supply for your want that there may be equality
as it is written he that had gathered Much had nothing over
and he that had gathered little had no lack.
but thanks be to God which put the same earnest care into the
heart of Titus for you.
for indeed he accepted the exhortation but being more
forward of his own accord he went unto you.
and we have sent with him the brother whose praise is in the
gospel throughout all the churches
and not that only but who was also chosen of the churches to
travel with us with this grace which is administered by us to
the glory of the same lord and declaration of your ready
mind
avoiding this that no man should blame us in this abundance
which is administered by us
providing for honest things not only in the sight of the
lord but also in the sight of men.
and we have sent with them our brother whom we have
oftentimes proved diligent in many things but now Much more
diligent upon the great confidence which I have in you.
whether any do enquire of Titus he is my partner and
fellowhelper concerning you or our brethren be enquired of
they are the messengers of the churches and the glory of
Christ.
wherefore shew ye to them and before the churches the proof
of your love and of our boasting on your behalf.
for as touching the ministering to the saints it is
superfluous for me to write to you
for I know the forwardness of your mind for which I boast of
you to them of Macedonia that Achaia was ready a year ago
and your zeal hath provoked very many.
yet have I sent the brethren lest our boasting of you should
be in vain in this behalf that as I said ye may be ready
lest haply if they of Macedonia come with me and find you
unprepared we that we say not ye should be ashamed in this
same confident boasting.
therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren that
they would go before unto you and make up beforehand your
bounty whereof ye had notice before that the same might be
ready as a matter of bounty and not as of covetousness.
but this I say he which soweth sparingly shall reap also
sparingly and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also
bountifully.
every man according as he purposeth in his heart so let him
give not grudgingly or of necessity for God loveth a
cheerful giver.
and God is able to make all grace abound toward you that ye
always having all sufficiency in all things may abound to
every good work
 as it is written he hath dispersed abroad he hath given to
the poor his righteousness remaineth for ever.
now he that ministereth seed to the sower both minister bread
for your food and multiply your seed sown and increase the
fruits of your righteousness
being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness which
causeth through us thanksgiving to God.
for the administration of this service not only supplieth the
want of the saints but is abundant also by many thanksgivings
unto God
whiles by the experiment of this ministration they glorify God
for your professed subjection unto the gospel of Christ and
for your liberal distribution unto them and unto all men
and by their prayer for you which long after you for the
exceeding grace of God in you.
thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift.
now I Paul myself beseech you by the meekness and gentleness
of Christ who in presence Am base among you but being absent
Am bold toward you
but I beseech you that I may not be bold when I Am present
with that confidence wherewith I think to be bold against
some which think of us as if we walked according to the
flesh.
for though we walk in the flesh we do not war after the
flesh
 for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but Mighty
through God to the pulling down of strong holds
casting down imaginations and every high thing that exalteth
itself against the knowledge of God and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ
and having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience when
your obedience is fulfilled.
do ye look on things after the outward appearance? if any man
trust to himself that he is Christ s let him of himself think
this again that as he is Christ s even so are we Christ s.
for though I should boast somewhat more of our authority
which the lord hath given us for edification and not for your
destruction I should not be ashamed
that I may not seem as if I would terrify you by letters.
for his letters say they are weighty and powerful but his
bodily presence is weak and his speech contemptible.
let such an one think this that such as we are in word by
letters when we are absent such will we be also in deed when
we are present.
for we dare not make ourselves of the number or compare
ourselves with some that commend themselves but they
measuring themselves by themselves and comparing themselves
among themselves are not wise.
but we will not boast of things without our measure but
according to the measure of the rule which God hath
distributed to us a measure to reach even unto you.
for we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure as though we
reached not unto you for we are come as far as to you also in
preaching the gospel of Christ
not boasting of things without our measure that is of other
men s labours but having hope when your faith is increased
that we shall be enlarged by you according to our rule
abundantly
to preach the gospel in the regions beyond you and not to
boast in another man s line of things made ready to our hand.
but he that glorieth let him glory in the lord.
for not he that commendeth himself is approved but whom the
lord commendeth.
would to God ye could bear with me a little in my folly and
indeed bear with me.
for I Am jealous over you with godly jealousy for I have
espoused you to one husband that I may present you as a
chaste virgin to Christ.
but I fear lest by any means as the serpent beguiled Eve
through his subtilty so your minds should be corrupted from
the simplicity that is in Christ.
for if he that cometh preacheth another Jesus whom we have
not preached or if ye receive another spirit which ye have
not received or another gospel which ye have not accepted
ye might well bear with him.
for I suppose I was not a whit behind the very chiefest
apostles.
but though I be rude in speech yet not in knowledge but we
have been throughly made manifest among you in all things.
have I committed an offence in abasing myself that ye might be
exalted because I have preached to you the gospel of God
freely?
I robbed other churches taking wages of them to do you
service.
and when I was present with you and wanted I was chargeable
to no man for that which was lacking to me the brethren which
came from Macedonia supplied and in all things I have kept
myself from being burdensome unto you and so will I keep
myself.
as the truth of Christ is in me no man shall stop me of this
boasting in the regions of Achaia.
wherefore? because I love you not? God knoweth.
but what I do that I will do that I may cut off occasion
from them which desire occasion that wherein they glory they
may be found even as we.
for such are false apostles deceitful workers transforming
themselves into the apostles of Christ.
and no marvel for Satan himself is transformed into an angel
of light.
therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be
transformed as the ministers of righteousness whose end shall
be according to their works.
I say again let no man think me a fool if otherwise yet as
a fool receive me that I may boast myself a little.
that which I speak I speak it not after the lord but as it
were foolishly in this confidence of boasting.
seeing that many glory after the flesh I will glory also.
for ye suffer fools gladly seeing ye yourselves are wise.
for ye suffer if a man bring you into bondage if a man
devour you if a man take of you if a man exalt himself if a
man smite you on the face.
I speak as concerning reproach as though we had been weak.
howbeit whereinsoever any is bold I speak foolishly I Am
bold also.
are they Hebrews? so Am I. are they Israelites? so Am I. are
they the seed of Abraham? so Am I.
are they ministers of Christ? I speak as a fool I Am more
in labours more abundant in stripes above measure in prisons
more frequent in deaths oft.
of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one.
thrice was I beaten with rods once was I stoned thrice I
suffered shipwreck a night and a day I have been in the deep
in journeyings often in perils of waters in perils of
robbers in perils by mine own countrymen in perils by the
heathen in perils in the city in perils in the wilderness
in perils in the sea in perils among false brethren
in weariness and painfulness in watchings often in hunger
and thirst in fastings often in cold and nakedness.
beside those things that are without that which cometh upon
me daily the care of all the churches.
who is weak and I Am not weak? who is offended and I burn
not?
if I must needs glory I will glory of the things which
concern mine infirmities.
the God and father of our lord Jesus Christ which is blessed
for evermore knoweth that I lie not.
in Damascus the Governor under Aretas the king kept the city
of the Damascenes with a garrison desirous to apprehend me
and through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall
and escaped his hands.
it is not expedient for me doubtless to glory. I will come to
visions and revelations of the lord.
I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago whether in
the body I cannot tell or whether out of the body I cannot
tell God knoweth such an one caught up to the third heaven.
and I knew such a man whether in the body or out of the
body I cannot tell God knoweth
how that he was caught up into paradise and heard unspeakable
words which it is not lawful for a man to utter.
of such an one will I glory yet of myself I will not glory
but in mine infirmities.
for though I would desire to glory I shall not be a fool for
I will say the truth but now I forbear lest any man should
think of me above that which he seeth me to be or that he
heareth of me.
and lest I should be exalted above measure through the
abundance of the revelations there was given to me a thorn in
the flesh the messenger of Satan to buffet me lest I should
be exalted above measure.
for this thing I besought the lord thrice that it might
depart from me.
and he said unto me my grace is sufficient for thee for my
strength is made perfect in weakness. most gladly therefore
will I rather glory in my infirmities that the power of
Christ may rest upon me.
therefore I take pleasure in infirmities in reproaches in
necessities in persecutions in distresses for Christ s sake
for when I Am weak then Am I strong.
I Am become a fool in glorying ye have compelled me for I
ought to have been commended of you for in nothing Am I
behind the very chiefest apostles though I be nothing.
truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all
patience in signs and wonders and Mighty deeds.
for what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches
except it be that I myself was not burdensome to you? forgive
me this wrong.
behold the third time I Am ready to come to you and I will
not be burdensome to you for I seek not your s but you for
the children ought not to lay up for the parents but the
parents for the children.
and I will very gladly spend and be spent for you though the
more abundantly I love you the less I be loved.
but be it so I did not burden you nevertheless being
crafty I caught you with guile.
did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I sent unto you?
I desired Titus and with him I sent a brother. did Titus make
a gain of you? walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not
in the same steps?
again think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you? we speak
before God in Christ but we do all things dearly beloved
for your edifying.
for I fear lest when I come I shall not find you such as I
would and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would
not lest there be debates envyings wraths strifes
backbitings whisperings swellings tumults
and lest when I come again my God will humble me among you
and that I shall bewail many which have sinned already and
have not repented of the uncleanness and fornication and
lasciviousness which they have committed.
this is the third time I Am coming to you. in the mouth of two
or three witnesses shall every word be established.
I told you before and foretell you as if I were present the
second time and being absent now I write to them which
heretofore have sinned and to all other that if I come
again I will not spare
since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me which to
you-ward is not weak but is Mighty in you.
for though he was crucified through weakness yet he liveth by
the power of God. for we also are weak in him but we shall
live with him by the power of God toward you.
examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith prove your own
selves. know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is
in you except ye be reprobates?
but I trust that ye shall know that we are not reprobates.
now I pray to God that ye do no evil not that we should
appear approved but that ye should do that which is honest
though we be as reprobates.
for we can do nothing against the truth but for the truth.
for we are glad when we are weak and ye are strong and this
also we wish even your perfection.
therefore I write these things being absent lest being
present I should use sharpness according to the power which
the lord hath given me to edification and not to destruction.
finally brethren farewell. be perfect be of good comfort
be of one mind live in peace and the God of love and peace
shall be with you.
greet one another with an holy Kiss.
all the saints salute you.
the grace of the lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and
the communion of the holy ghost be with you all. Amen.
Paul an apostle not of men Neither by man but by Jesus
Christ and God the father who raised him from the dead
and all the brethren which are with me unto the churches of
Galatia
grace be to you and peace from God the father and from our
lord Jesus Christ
who gave himself for our sins that he might deliver us from
this present evil world according to the will of God and our
father
to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you
into the grace of Christ unto another gospel
which is not another but there be some that trouble you and
would pervert the gospel of Christ.
but though we or an angel from heaven preach any other
gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you let
him be accursed.
as we said before so say I now again if any man preach any
other gospel unto you than that ye have received let him be
accursed.
for do I now persuade men or God? or do I seek to please men?
for if I yet pleased men I should not be the servant of
Christ.
but I certify you brethren that the gospel which was
preached of me is not after man.
for I Neither received it of man Neither was I taught it but
by the revelation of Jesus Christ.
for ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews
religion how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of
God and wasted it
and profited in the Jews religion above many my equals in
mine own nation being more exceedingly zealous of the
traditions of my fathers.
but when it pleased God who separated me from my mother s
womb and called me by his grace
to reveal his son in me that I might preach him among the
heathen Immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood
Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles
before me but I went into Arabia and returned again unto
Damascus.
then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter
and abode with him fifteen days.
but other of the apostles saw I none save James the lord s
brother.
now the things which I write unto you behold before God I
lie not.
afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia
and was unknown by face unto the churches of Judaea which were
in Christ
but they had heard only that he which persecuted us in times
past now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed.
and they glorified God in me.
then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem with
Barnabas and took Titus with me also.
and I went up by revelation and communicated unto them that
gospel which I preach among the Gentiles but privately to
them which were of reputation lest by any means I should run
or had run in vain.
but Neither Titus who was with me being a Greek was
compelled to be circumcised
and that because of false brethren unawares brought in who
came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ
Jesus that they might bring us into bondage
to whom we gave place by subjection no not for an hour that
the truth of the gospel might continue with you.
but of these who seemed to be somewhat whatsoever they were
it maketh no matter to me God accepteth no man s person for
they who seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to
me
but contrariwise when they saw that the gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed unto me as the gospel of the
circumcision was unto Peter
 for he that wrought effectually in Peter to the apostleship
of the circumcision the same was Mighty in me toward the
Gentiles
and when James Cephas and John who seemed to be pillars
perceived the grace that was given unto me they gave to me
and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship that we should go
unto the heathen and they unto the circumcision.
only they would that we should remember the poor the same
which I also was forward to do.
but when Peter was come to Antioch I withstood him to the
face because he was to be blamed.
for before that certain came from James he did eat with the
Gentiles but when they were come he withdrew and separated
himself fearing them which were of the circumcision.
and the other Jews dissembled likewise with him insomuch that
Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.
but when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the
truth of the gospel I said unto Peter before them all if
thou being a Jew livest after the manner of Gentiles and
not as do the Jews why compellest thou the Gentiles to live
as do the Jews?
we who are Jews by nature and not sinners of the Gentiles
knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law
but by the faith of Jesus Christ even we have believed in
Jesus Christ that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ and not by the works of the law for by the works of
the law shall no flesh be justified.
but if while we seek to be justified by Christ we ourselves
also are found sinners is therefore Christ the minister of
Sin? God forbid.
for if I build again the things which I destroyed I make
myself a transgressor.
for I through the law Am dead to the law that I might live
unto God.
I Am crucified with Christ neverthless I live yet not I but
Christ liveth in me and the life which I now live in the
flesh I live by the faith of the son of God who loved me and
gave himself for me.
I do not frustrate the grace of God for if righteousness come
by the law then Christ is dead in vain.
O foolish Galatians who hath bewitched you that ye should
not obey the truth before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been
evidently set forth crucified among you?
this only would I learn of you received ye the spirit by the
works of the law or by the hearing of faith?
are ye so foolish? having begun in the spirit are ye now made
perfect by the flesh?
have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain.
he therefore that ministereth to you the spirit and worketh
miracles among you doeth he it by the works of the law or by
the hearing of faith?
even as Abraham believed God and it was accounted to him for
righteousness.
know ye therefore that they which are of faith the same are
the children of Abraham.
and the scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
heathen through faith preached before the gospel unto
Abraham saying in thee shall all nations be blessed.
so then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful
Abraham.
for as many as are of the works of the law are under the
curse for it is written cursed is every one that continueth
not in all things which are written in the book of the law to
do them.
but that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God
it is evident for the just shall live by faith.
and the law is not of faith but the man that doeth them
shall live in them.
Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law being made
a curse for us for it is written cursed is every one that
hangeth on a tree
that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ that we might receive the promise of the
spirit through faith.
brethren I speak after the manner of men though it be but a
man s covenant yet if it be confirmed no man disannulleth
or addeth thereto.
now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. he saith
not and to seeds as of many but as of one and to thy seed
which is Christ.
and this I say that the covenant that was confirmed before
of God in Christ the law which was four hundred and thirty
years after cannot disannul that it should make the promise
of none effect.
for if the inheritance be of the law it is no more of
promise but God gave it to Abraham by promise.
wherefore then serveth the law? it was added because of
transgressions till the seed should come to whom the promise
was made and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a
mediator.
now a mediator is not a mediator of one but God is one.
is the law then against the promises of God? God forbid for
if there had been a law given which could have given life
verily righteousness should have been by the law.
but the scripture hath concluded all under Sin that the
promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that
believe.
but before faith came we were kept under the law shut up
unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed.
wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ that we might be justified by faith.
but after that faith is come we are no longer under a
schoolmaster.
for ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.
for as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put
on Christ.
there is Neither Jew nor Greek there is Neither bond nor
free there is Neither Male nor female for ye are all one in
Christ Jesus.
and if ye be Christ s then are ye Abraham s seed and heirs
according to the promise.
now I say that the heir as long as he is a child differeth
nothing from a servant though he be lord of all
but is under tutors and governors until the time appointed of
the father.
even so we when we were children were in bondage under the
elements of the world
but when the fulness of the time was come God sent forth his
son made of a woman made under the law
to redeem them that were under the law that we might receive
the adoption of sons.
and because ye are sons God hath sent forth the spirit of his
son into your hearts crying Abba father.
wherefore thou art no more a servant but a son and if a son
then an heir of God through Christ.
howbeit then when ye knew not God ye did service unto them
which by nature are no gods.
but now after that ye have known God or rather are known of
God how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements
whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage?
ye observe days and months and times and years.
I Am afraid of you lest I have bestowed upon you labour in
vain.
brethren I beseech you be as I Am for I Am as ye are ye
have not injured me at all.
ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the
gospel unto you at the first.
and my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not nor
rejected but received me as an angel of God even as Christ
Jesus.
where is then the blessedness ye spake of? for I bear you
record that if it had been possible ye would have plucked
out your own eyes and have given them to me.
Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the
truth?
they zealously affect you but not well yea they would
exclude you that ye might affect them.
but it is good to be zealously affected always in a good
thing and not only when I Am present with you.
my little children of whom I travail in birth again until
Christ be formed in you
I desire to be present with you now and to change my voice
for I stand in doubt of you.
tell me ye that desire to be under the law do ye not hear
the law?
for it is written that Abraham had two sons the one by a
bondmaid the other by a freewoman.
but he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh but
he of the freewoman was by promise.
which things are an allegory for these are the two covenants
the one from the mount Sinai which gendereth to bondage
which is Agar.
for this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia and answereth to
Jerusalem which now is and is in bondage with her children.
but Jerusalem which is above is free which is the mother of
us all.
for it is written rejoice thou barren that bearest not
break forth and cry thou that travailest not for the
desolate hath many more children than she which hath an
husband.
now we brethren as Isaac was are the children of promise.
but as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him
that was born after the spirit even so it is now.
nevertheless what saith the scripture? cast out the bondwoman
and her son for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir
with the son of the freewoman.
so then brethren we are not children of the bondwoman but
of the free.
stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made
us free and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
behold I Paul say unto you that if ye be circumcised Christ
shall profit you nothing.
for I testify again to every man that is circumcised that he
is a debtor to do the whole law.
Christ is become of no effect unto you whosoever of you are
justified by the law ye are fallen from grace.
for we through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness
by faith.
for in Jesus Christ Neither circumcision availeth any thing
nor uncircumcision but faith which worketh by love.
ye did run well who did hinder you that ye should not obey
the truth?
this persuasion cometh not of him that calleth you.
a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
I have confidence in you through the lord that ye will be
none otherwise minded but he that troubleth you shall bear
his judgment whosoever he be.
and I brethren if I yet preach circumcision why do I yet
suffer persecution? then is the offence of the cross ceased.
I would they were even cut off which trouble you.
for brethren ye have been called unto liberty only use not
liberty for an occasion to the flesh but by love serve one
another.
for all the law is fulfilled in one word even in this thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
but if ye bite and devour one another take heed that ye be
not consumed one of another.
this I say then walk in the spirit and ye shall not fulfil
the lust of the flesh.
for the flesh lusteth against the spirit and the spirit
against the flesh and these are contrary the one to the
other so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.
but if ye be led of the spirit ye are not under the law.
now the works of the flesh are manifest which are these
adultery fornication uncleanness lasciviousness
idolatry witchcraft hatred variance emulations wrath
strife seditions heresies
envyings murders drunkenness revellings and such like of
the which I tell you before as I have also told you in time
past that they which do such things shall not inherit the
kingdom of God.
but the fruit of the spirit is love joy peace
longsuffering gentleness goodness faith
meekness temperance against such there is no law.
and they that are Christ s have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.
if we live in the spirit let us also walk in the spirit.
let us not be desirous of vain glory provoking one another
envying one another.
brethren if a man be overtaken in a fault ye which are
spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness
considering thyself lest thou also be tempted.
bear ye one another s burdens and so fulfil the law of
Christ.
for if a man think himself to be something when he is
nothing he deceiveth himself.
but let every man prove his own work and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself alone and not in another.
for every man shall bear his own burden.
let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that
teacheth in all good things.
be not deceived God is not mocked for whatsoever a man
soweth that shall he also reap.
for he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption but he that soweth to the spirit shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting.
and let us not be weary in well doing for in due season we
shall reap if we faint not.
as we have therefore opportunity let us do good unto all men
especially unto them who are of the household of faith.
ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine
own hand.
as many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh they
constrain you to be circumcised only lest they should suffer
persecution for the cross of Christ.
for Neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the law
but desire to have you circumcised that they may glory in
your flesh.
but God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our
lord Jesus Christ by whom the world is crucified unto me and
I unto the world.
for in Christ Jesus Neither circumcision availeth any thing
nor uncircumcision but a new creature.
and as many as walk according to this rule peace be on them
and mercy and upon the Israel of God.
from henceforth let no man trouble me for I bear in my body
the marks of the lord Jesus.
brethren the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with your
spirit. Amen.
Paul an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God to the
saints which are at Ephesus and to the faithful in Christ
Jesus
grace be to you and peace from God our father and from the
lord Jesus Christ.
blessed be the God and father of our lord Jesus Christ who
hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ
according as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of
the world that we should be holy and without blame before him
in love
having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus
Christ to himself according to the good pleasure of his will
to the praise of the glory of his grace wherein he hath made
us accepted in the beloved.
in whom we have redemption through his blood the forgiveness
of sins according to the Riches of his grace
wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence
having made known unto us the mystery of his will according
to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself
that in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might
gather together in one all things in Christ both which are in
heaven and which are on earth even in him
in whom also we have obtained an inheritance being
predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all
things after the counsel of his own will
that we should be to the praise of his glory who first
trusted in Christ.
in whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the word of
truth the gospel of your salvation in whom also after that
ye believed ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise
which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption
of the purchased possession unto the praise of his glory.
wherefore I also after I heard of your faith in the lord
Jesus and love unto all the saints
cease not to give thanks for you making mention of you in my
prayers
that the God of our lord Jesus Christ the father of glory
may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened that ye may
know what is the hope of his calling and what the Riches of
the glory of his inheritance in the saints
and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward
who believe according to the working of his Mighty power
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead
and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places
far above all principality and power and might and
dominion and every name that is named not only in this
world but also in that which is to come
and hath put all things under his feet and gave him to be the
head over all things to the church
which is his body the fulness of him that filleth all in all.
and you hath he quickened who were dead in trespasses and
sins
wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this
world according to the prince of the power of the air the
spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience
among whom also we all had our conversation in times past in
the lusts of our flesh fulfilling the desires of the flesh
and of the mind and were by nature the children of wrath
even as others.
but God who is rich in mercy for his great love wherewith he
loved us
even when we were dead in sins hath quickened us together
with Christ by grace ye are saved
and hath raised us up together and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus
that in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding Riches of
his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus.
for by grace are ye saved through faith and that not of
yourselves it is the gift of God
not of works lest any man should boast.
for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works which God hath before ordained that we should walk in
them.
wherefore remember that ye being in time past Gentiles in the
flesh who are called uncircumcision by that which is called
the circumcision in the flesh made by hands
that at that time ye were without Christ being aliens from
the commonwealth of Israel and strangers from the covenants
of promise having no hope and without God in the world
but now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off are made
nigh by the blood of Christ.
for he is our peace who hath made both one and hath broken
down the middle wall of partition between us
having abolished in his flesh the enmity even the law of
commandments contained in ordinances for to make in himself
of twain one new man so making peace
and that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the
cross having slain the enmity thereby
and came and preached peace to you which were afar off and to
them that were nigh.
for through him we both have access by one spirit unto the
father.
now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners but
fellowcitizens with the saints and of the household of God
and are built upon the foundation of the apostles and
prophets Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone
in whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an
holy temple in the lord
in whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God
through the spirit.
for this cause I Paul the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you
Gentiles
if ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which
is given me to you-ward
how that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery as
I wrote afore in few words
whereby when ye read ye may understand my knowledge in the
mystery of Christ
which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men
as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by
the spirit
that the Gentiles should be fellowheirs and of the same body
and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel
whereof I was made a minister according to the gift of the
grace of God given unto me by the effectual working of his
power.
unto me who Am less than the least of all saints is this
grace given that I should preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable Riches of Christ
and to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery
which from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God
who created all things by Jesus Christ
to the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold
wisdom of God
according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ
Jesus our lord
in whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the
faith of him.
wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for
you which is your glory.
for this cause I bow my knees unto the father of our lord
Jesus Christ
of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named
that he would grant you according to the Riches of his glory
to be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man
that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith that ye being
rooted and grounded in love
may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth
and length and depth and height
and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge that
ye might be filled with all the fulness of God.
now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think according to the power that worketh in
us
unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all
ages world without end. Amen.
I therefore the prisoner of the lord beseech you that ye
walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called
with all lowliness and meekness with longsuffering
forbearing one another in love
endeavouring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace.
there is one body and one spirit even as ye are called in
one hope of your calling
one lord one faith one baptism
one God and father of all who is above all and through all
and in you all.
but unto every one of us is given grace according to the
measure of the gift of Christ.
wherefore he saith when he ascended up on high he led
captivity captive and gave gifts unto men.
 now that he ascended what is it but that he also descended
first into the lower parts of the earth?
he that descended is the same also that ascended up far above
all heavens that he might fill all things.
and he gave some apostles and some prophets and some
evangelists and some pastors and teachers
for the perfecting of the saints for the work of the
ministry for the edifying of the body of Christ
till we all come in the unity of the faith and of the
knowledge of the son of God unto a perfect man unto the
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ
that we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro and
carried about with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of
men and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to
deceive
but speaking the truth in love may grow up into him in all
things which is the head even Christ
from whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted
by that which every joint supplieth according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part maketh
increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love.
this I say therefore and testify in the lord that ye
henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk in the vanity of
their mind
having the understanding darkened being alienated from the
life of God through the ignorance that is in them because of
the blindness of their heart
who being past feeling have given themselves over unto
lasciviousness to work all uncleanness with greediness.
but ye have not so learned Christ
if so be that ye have heard him and have been taught by him
as the truth is in Jesus
that ye put off concerning the former conversation the old
man which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts
and be renewed in the spirit of your mind
and that ye put on the new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.
wherefore putting away lying speak every man truth with his
neighbour for we are members one of another.
be ye angry and Sin not let not the sun go down upon your
wrath
Neither give place to the devil.
let him that stole steal no more but rather let him labour
working with his hands the thing which is good that he may
have to give to him that needeth.
let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth but
that which is good to the use of edifying that it may
minister grace unto the hearers.
and grieve not the holy spirit of God whereby ye are sealed
unto the day of redemption.
let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamour and
evil speaking be put away from you with all malice
and be ye kind one to another tenderhearted forgiving one
another even as God for Christ s sake hath forgiven you.
be ye therefore followers of God as dear children
and walk in love as Christ also hath loved us and hath given
himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a
sweetsmelling savour.
but fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness let it
not be once named among you as becometh saints
Neither filthiness nor foolish talking nor jesting which
are not convenient but rather giving of thanks.
for this ye know that no whoremonger nor unclean person nor
covetous man who is an idolater hath any inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ and of God.
let no man deceive you with vain words for because of these
things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience.
be not ye therefore partakers with them.
for ye were sometimes darkness but now are ye light in the
lord walk as children of light
 for the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness and
righteousness and truth
proving what is acceptable unto the lord.
and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness
but rather reprove them.
for it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done
of them in secret.
but all things that are reproved are made manifest by the
light for whatsoever doth make manifest is light.
wherefore he saith awake thou that sleepest and Arise from
the dead and Christ shall give thee light.
see then that ye walk circumspectly not as fools but as
wise
redeeming the time because the days are evil.
wherefore be ye not unwise but understanding what the will of
the lord is.
and be not drunk with wine wherein is excess but be filled
with the spirit
speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual
songs singing and making melody in your heart to the lord
giving thanks always for all things unto God and the father in
the name of our lord Jesus Christ
submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God.
wives submit yourselves unto your own husbands as unto the
lord.
for the husband is the head of the wife even as Christ is the
head of the church and he is the saviour of the body.
therefore as the church is subject unto Christ so let the
wives be to their own husbands in every thing.
husbands love your wives even as Christ also loved the
church and gave himself for it
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of
water by the word
that he might present it to himself a glorious church not
having spot or wrinkle or any such thing but that it should
be holy and without blemish.
so ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. he that
loveth his wife loveth himself.
for no man ever yet hated his own flesh but nourisheth and
cherisheth it even as the lord the church
for we are members of his body of his flesh and of his
bones.
for this cause shall a man leave his father and mother and
shall be joined unto his wife and they two shall be one
flesh.
this is a great mystery but I speak concerning Christ and the
church.
nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his
wife even as himself and the wife see that she reverence her
husband.
children obey your parents in the lord for this is right.
honour thy father and mother which is the first commandment
with promise
that it may be well with thee and thou mayest live long on
the earth.
and ye fathers provoke not your children to wrath but bring
them up in the nurture and admonition of the lord.
servants be obedient to them that are your masters according
to the flesh with fear and trembling in singleness of your
heart as unto Christ
not with eyeservice as menpleasers but as the servants of
Christ doing the will of God from the heart
with good will doing service as to the lord and not to men
knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth the same
shall he receive of the lord whether he be bond or free.
and ye masters do the same things unto them forbearing
threatening knowing that your Master also is in heaven
Neither is there respect of persons with him.
finally my brethren be strong in the lord and in the power
of his might.
put on the whole armour of God that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil.
for we wrestle not against flesh and blood but against
principalities against powers against the rulers of the
darkness of this world against spiritual wickedness in high
places.
wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God that ye may
be able to withstand in the evil day and having done all to
stand.
stand therefore having your loins girt about with truth and
having on the breastplate of righteousness
and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of
peace
above all taking the shield of faith wherewith ye shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.
and take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the spirit
which is the word of God
praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit
and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication
for all saints
and for me that utterance may be given unto me that I may
open my mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the gospel
for which I Am an ambassador in bonds that therein I may
speak boldly as I ought to speak.
but that ye also may know my affairs and how I do Tychicus
a beloved brother and faithful minister in the lord shall
make known to you all things
whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose that ye might
know our affairs and that he might comfort your hearts.
peace be to the brethren and love with faith from God the
father and the lord Jesus Christ.
grace be with all them that love our lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity. Amen.
Paul and Timotheus the servants of Jesus Christ to all the
saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi with the bishops
and deacons
grace be unto you and peace from God our father and from
the lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God upon every remembrance of you
always in every prayer of mine for you all making request with
joy
for your fellowship in the gospel from the first day until
now
being confident of this very thing that he which hath begun a
good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ
even as it is meet for me to think this of you all because I
have you in my heart inasmuch as both in my bonds and in the
defence and confirmation of the gospel ye all are partakers
of my grace.
for God is my record how greatly I long after you all in the
bowels of Jesus Christ.
and this I pray that your love may abound yet more and more
in knowledge and in all judgment
that ye may approve things that are excellent that ye may be
sincere and without offence till the day of Christ.
being filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by
Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.
but I would ye should understand brethren that the things
which happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the
furtherance of the gospel
so that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace and
in all other places
and many of the brethren in the lord waxing confident by my
bonds are Much more bold to speak the word without fear.
some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife and some
also of good will
the one preach Christ of contention not sincerely supposing
to add affliction to my bonds
but the other of love knowing that I Am set for the defence
of the gospel.
what then? notwithstanding every way whether in pretence or
in truth Christ is preached and I therein do rejoice yea
and will rejoice.
for I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your
prayer and the supply of the spirit of Jesus Christ
according to my earnest expectation and my hope that in
nothing I shall be ashamed but that with all boldness as
always so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body
whether it be by life or by death.
for to me to live is Christ and to die is gain.
but if I live in the flesh this is the fruit of my labour
yet what I shall choose I wot not.
for I Am in a strait betwixt two having a desire to depart
and to be with Christ which is far better
nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.
and having this confidence I know that I shall abide and
continue with you all for your furtherance and joy of faith
that your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for
me by my coming to you again.
only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of
Christ that whether I come and see you or else be absent I
may hear of your affairs that ye stand fast in one spirit
with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel
and in nothing terrified by your adversaries which is to them
an evident token of perdition but to you of salvation and
that of God.
for unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ not only to
believe on him but also to suffer for his sake
having the same conflict which ye saw in me and now hear to
be in me.
if there be therefore any consolation in Christ if any
comfort of love if any fellowship of the spirit if any
bowels and mercies
fulfil ye my joy that ye be likeminded having the same love
being of one accord of one mind.
let nothing be done through strife or vainglory but in
lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than
themselves.
look not every man on his own things but every man also on
the things of others.
let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus
who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be
equal with God
but made himself of no reputation and took upon him the form
of a servant and was made in the likeness of men
and being found in fashion as a man he humbled himself and
became obedient unto death even the death of the cross.
wherefore God also hath highly exalted him and given him a
name which is above every name
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow of things in
heaven and things in earth and things under the earth
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is
lord to the glory of God the father.
wherefore my beloved as ye have always obeyed not as in my
presence only but now Much more in my absence work out your
own salvation with fear and trembling.
for it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of
his good pleasure.
do all things without murmurings and disputings
that ye may be blameless and harmless the sons of God
without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation
among whom ye shine as lights in the world
holding forth the word of life that I may rejoice in the day
of Christ that I have not run in vain Neither laboured in
vain.
yea and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of
your faith I joy and rejoice with you all.
for the same cause also do ye joy and rejoice with me.
but I trust in the lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto
you that I also may be of good comfort when I know your
state.
for I have no man likeminded who will naturally care for your
state.
for all seek their own not the things which are Jesus
Christ s.
but ye know the proof of him that as a son with the father
he hath served with me in the gospel.
him therefore I hope to send presently so soon as I shall see
how it will go with me.
but I trust in the lord that I also myself shall come shortly.
yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus my
brother and companion in labour and fellowsoldier but your
messenger and he that ministered to my wants.
for he longed after you all and was full of heaviness
because that ye had heard that he had been sick.
for indeed he was sick nigh unto death but God had mercy on
him and not on him only but on me also lest I should have
sorrow upon sorrow.
I sent him therefore the more carefully that when ye see him
again ye may rejoice and that I may be the less sorrowful.
receive him therefore in the lord with all gladness and hold
such in reputation
because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death not
regarding his life to supply your lack of service toward me.
finally my brethren rejoice in the lord. to write the same
things to you to me indeed is not grievous but for you it is
safe.
beware of dogs beware of evil workers beware of the
concision.
for we are the circumcision which worship God in the spirit
and rejoice in Christ Jesus and have no confidence in the
flesh.
though I might also have confidence in the flesh. if any other
man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh
I more
circumcised the eighth day of the stock of Israel of the
tribe of Benjamin an Hebrew of the Hebrews as touching the
law a Pharisee
concerning zeal persecuting the church touching the
righteousness which is in the law blameless.
but what things were gain to me those I counted loss for
Christ.
yea doubtless and I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my lord for whom
I have suffered the loss of all things and do count them but
dung that I may win Christ
and be found in him not having mine own righteousness which
is of the law but that which is through the faith of Christ
the righteousness which is of God by faith
that I may know him and the power of his resurrection and
the fellowship of his sufferings being made conformable unto
his death
if by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the
dead.
not as though I had already attained either were already
perfect but I follow after if that I may apprehend that for
which also I Am apprehended of Christ Jesus.
brethren I count not myself to have apprehended but this one
thing I do forgetting those things which are behind and
reaching forth unto those things which are before
I press toward the Mark for the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus.
let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded and
if in any thing ye be otherwise minded God shall reveal even
this unto you.
nevertheless whereto we have already attained let us walk by
the same rule let us mind the same thing.
brethren be followers together of me and Mark them which
walk so as ye have us for an ensample.
 for many walk of whom I have told you often and now tell
you even weeping that they are the enemies of the cross of
Christ
whose end is destruction whose God is their belly and whose
glory is in their shame who mind earthly things.
for our conversation is in heaven from whence also we look
for the saviour the lord Jesus Christ
who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body according to the working whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself.
therefore my brethren dearly beloved and longed for my joy
and crown so stand fast in the lord my dearly beloved.
I beseech Euodias and beseech Syntyche that they be of the
same mind in the lord.
and I intreat thee also true yokefellow help those women
which laboured with me in the gospel with Clement also and
with other my fellowlabourers whose names are in the book of
life.
rejoice in the lord alway and again I say rejoice.
let your moderation be known unto all men. the lord is at
hand.
be careful for nothing but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known
unto God.
and the peace of God which passeth all understanding shall
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.
finally brethren whatsoever things are true whatsoever
things are honest whatsoever things are just whatsoever
things are pure whatsoever things are lovely whatsoever
things are of good report if there be any virtue and if
there be any praise think on these things.
those things which ye have both learned and received and
heard and seen in me do and the God of peace shall be with
you.
but I rejoiced in the lord greatly that now at the last your
care of me hath flourished again wherein ye were also
careful but ye lacked opportunity.
not that I speak in respect of want for I have learned in
whatsoever state I Am therewith to be content.
I know both how to be abased and I know how to abound every
where and in all things I Am instructed both to be full and to
be hungry both to abound and to suffer need.
I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.
notwithstanding ye have well done that ye did communicate
with my affliction.
now ye Philippians know also that in the beginning of the
gospel when I departed from Macedonia no church communicated
with me as concerning giving and receiving but ye only.
for even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my
necessity.
not because I desire a gift but I desire fruit that may
abound to your account.
but I have all and abound I Am full having received of
Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you an odour of
a sweet smell a sacrifice acceptable wellpleasing to God.
but my God shall supply all your need according to his Riches
in glory by Christ Jesus.
now unto God and our father be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
salute every saint in Christ Jesus. the brethren which are
with me greet you.
all the saints salute you chiefly they that are of Caesar s
household.
the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
Paul an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God and
Timotheus our brother
to the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at
Colosse grace be unto you and peace from God our father and
the lord Jesus Christ.
we give thanks to God and the father of our lord Jesus Christ
praying always for you
since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love
which ye have to all the saints
for the hope which is laid up for you in heaven whereof ye
heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel
which is come unto you as it is in all the world and
bringeth forth fruit as it doth also in you since the day ye
heard of it and knew the grace of God in truth
as ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellowservant who is
for you a faithful minister of Christ
who also declared unto us your love in the spirit.
for this cause we also since the day we heard it do not
cease to pray for you and to desire that ye might be filled
with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding
that ye might walk worthy of the lord unto all pleasing being
fruitful in every good work and increasing in the knowledge
of God
strengthened with all might according to his glorious power
unto all patience and longsuffering with joyfulness
giving thanks unto the father which hath made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light
who hath delivered us from the power of darkness and hath
translated us into the kingdom of his dear son
in whom we have redemption through his blood even the
forgiveness of sins
who is the image of the invisible God the firstborn of every
creature
for by him were all things created that are in heaven and
that are in earth visible and invisible whether they be
thrones or dominions or principalities or powers all
things were created by him and for him
and he is before all things and by him all things consist.
and he is the head of the body the church who is the
beginning the firstborn from the dead that in all things he
might have the preeminence.
for it pleased the father that in him should all fulness
dwell
and having made peace through the blood of his cross by him
to reconcile all things unto himself by him I say whether
they be things in earth or things in heaven.
and you that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind
by wicked works yet now hath he reconciled
in the body of his flesh through death to present you holy
and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight
if ye continue in the faith grounded and settled and be not
moved away from the hope of the gospel which ye have heard
and which was preached to every creature which is under
heaven whereof I Paul Am made a minister
who now rejoice in my sufferings for you and fill up that
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for
his body s sake which is the church
whereof I Am made a minister according to the dispensation of
God which is given to me for you to fulfil the word of God
even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from
generations but now is made manifest to his saints
to whom God would make known what is the Riches of the glory
of this mystery among the Gentiles which is Christ in you
the hope of glory
whom we preach warning every man and teaching every man in
all wisdom that we may present every man perfect in Christ
Jesus
whereunto I also labour striving according to his working
which worketh in me mightily.
for I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you
and for them at Laodicea and for as many as have not seen my
face in the flesh
that their hearts might be comforted being knit together in
love and unto all Riches of the full assurance of
understanding to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God
and of the father and of Christ
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
and this I say lest any man should beguile you with enticing
words.
for though I be absent in the flesh yet Am I with you in the
spirit joying and beholding your order and the stedfastness
of your faith in Christ.
as ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the lord so walk
ye in him
rooted and built up in him and stablished in the faith as ye
have been taught abounding therein with thanksgiving.
beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain
deceit after the tradition of men after the rudiments of the
world and not after Christ.
for in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.
and ye are complete in him which is the head of all
principality and power
in whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made
without hands in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh by the circumcision of Christ
buried with him in baptism wherein also ye are risen with him
through the faith of the operation of God who hath raised him
from the dead.
and you being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of
your flesh hath he quickened together with him having
forgiven you all trespasses
blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against
us which was contrary to us and took it out of the way
nailing it to his cross
and having spoiled principalities and powers he made a shew
of them openly triumphing over them in it.
let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink or in
respect of an holyday or of the new moon or of the sabbath
days
which are a shadow of things to come but the body is of
Christ.
let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility
and worshipping of angels intruding into those things which
he hath not seen vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind
and not holding the head from which all the body by joints
and Bands having nourishment ministered and knit together
increaseth with the increase of God.
wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world why as though living in the world are ye subject to
ordinances
 touch not taste not handle not
which all are to perish with the using after the
commandments and doctrines of men?
which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will worship and
humility and neglecting of the body not in any honour to the
satisfying of the flesh.
if ye then be risen with Christ seek those things which are
above where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.
set your affection on things above not on things on the
earth.
for ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ in God.
when Christ who is our life shall appear then shall ye also
appear with him in glory.
mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth
fornication uncleanness inordinate affection evil
concupiscence and covetousness which is idolatry
for which things sake the wrath of God cometh on the children
of disobedience
in the which ye also walked some time when ye lived in them.
but now ye also put off all these anger wrath malice
blasphemy filthy communication out of your mouth.
lie not one to another seeing that ye have put off the old
man with his deeds
and have put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge
after the image of him that created him
where there is Neither Greek nor Jew circumcision nor
uncircumcision Barbarian Scythian bond nor free but Christ
is all and in all.
put on therefore as the elect of God holy and beloved
bowels of mercies kindness humbleness of mind meekness
longsuffering
forbearing one another and forgiving one another if any man
have a quarrel against any even as Christ forgave you so
also do ye.
and above all these things put on charity which is the bond
of perfectness.
and let the peace of God rule in your hearts to the which
also ye are called in one body and be ye thankful.
let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom
teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and
spiritual songs singing with grace in your hearts to the
lord.
and whatsoever ye do in word or deed do all in the name of
the lord Jesus giving thanks to God and the father by him.
wives submit yourselves unto your own husbands as it is fit
in the lord.
husbands love your wives and be not bitter against them.
children obey your parents in all things for this is well
pleasing unto the lord.
fathers provoke not your children to anger lest they be
discouraged.
servants obey in all things your masters according to the
flesh not with eyeservice as menpleasers but in singleness
of heart fearing God
and whatsoever ye do do it heartily as to the lord and not
unto men
knowing that of the lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance for ye serve the lord Christ.
but he that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong which he
hath done and there is no respect of persons.
masters give unto your servants that which is just and equal
knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven.
continue in prayer and watch in the same with thanksgiving
withal praying also for us that God would open unto us a door
of utterance to speak the mystery of Christ for which I Am
also in bonds
that I may make it manifest as I ought to speak.
walk in wisdom toward them that are without redeeming the
time.
let your speech be alway with grace seasoned with salt that
ye may know how ye ought to answer every man.
all my state shall Tychicus declare unto you who is a beloved
brother and a faithful minister and fellowservant in the
lord
whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose that he might
know your estate and comfort your hearts
with Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother who is one of
you. they shall make known unto you all things which are done
here.
Aristarchus my fellowprisoner saluteth you and Marcus
sister s son to Barnabas touching whom ye received
commandments if he come unto you receive him
and Jesus which is called Justus who are of the
circumcision. these only are my fellowworkers unto the kingdom
of God which have been a comfort unto me.
Epaphras who is one of you a servant of Christ saluteth
you always labouring fervently for you in prayers that ye
may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.
for I bear him record that he hath a great zeal for you and
them that are in Laodicea and them in Hierapolis.
Luke the beloved Physician and Demas greet you.
salute the brethren which are in Laodicea and Nymphas and
the church which is in his house.
and when this epistle is read among you cause that it be read
also in the church of the Laodiceans and that ye likewise
read the epistle from Laodicea.
and say to Archippus take heed to the ministry which thou
hast received in the lord that thou fulfil it.
the salutation by the hand of me Paul. remember my bonds.
grace be with you. Amen.
Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus unto the church of the
Thessalonians which is in God the father and in the lord Jesus
Christ grace be unto you and peace from God our father and
the lord Jesus Christ.
we give thanks to God always for you all making mention of
you in our prayers
remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labour of
love and patience of hope in our lord Jesus Christ in the
sight of God and our father
knowing brethren beloved your election of God.
for our gospel came not unto you in word only but also in
power and in the holy ghost and in Much assurance as ye
know what manner of men we were among you for your sake.
and ye became followers of us and of the lord having
received the word in Much affliction with joy of the holy
ghost.
so that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and
Achaia.
for from you sounded out the word of the lord not only in
Macedonia and Achaia but also in every place your faith to
God-ward is spread abroad so that we need not to speak any
thing.
for they themselves shew of us what manner of entering in we
had unto you and how ye turned to God from idols to serve the
living and true God
and to wait for his son from heaven whom he raised from the
dead even Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come.
for yourselves brethren know our entrance in unto you that
it was not in vain
but even after that we had suffered before and were
shamefully entreated as ye know at Philippi we were bold in
our God to speak unto you the gospel of God with Much
contention.
for our exhortation was not of deceit nor of uncleanness nor
in guile
but as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the
gospel even so we speak not as pleasing men but God which
trieth our hearts.
for Neither at any time used we flattering words as ye know
nor a cloke of covetousness God is witness
nor of men sought we glory Neither of you nor yet of others
when we might have been burdensome as the apostles of Christ.
but we were gentle among you even as a nurse cherisheth her
children
so being affectionately desirous of you we were willing to
have imparted unto you not the gospel of God only but also
our own souls because ye were dear unto us.
for ye remember brethren our labour and travail for
labouring night and day because we would not be chargeable
unto any of you we preached unto you the gospel of God.
ye are witnesses and God also how holily and justly and
unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe
as ye know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one
of you as a father doth his children
that ye would walk worthy of God who hath called you unto his
kingdom and glory.
for this cause also thank we God without ceasing because
when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us ye
received it not as the word of men but as it is in truth the
word of God which effectually worketh also in you that
believe.
for ye brethren became followers of the churches of God
which in Judaea are in Christ Jesus for ye also have suffered
like things of your own countrymen even as they have of the
Jews
who both killed the lord Jesus and their own prophets and
have persecuted us and they please not God and are contrary
to all men
forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be
saved to fill up their sins alway for the wrath is come upon
them to the uttermost.
but we brethren being taken from you for a short time in
presence not in heart endeavoured the more abundantly to see
your face with great desire.
wherefore we would have come unto you even I Paul once and
again but Satan hindered us.
for what is our hope or joy or crown of rejoicing? are not
even ye in the presence of our lord Jesus Christ at his
coming?
for ye are our glory and joy.
wherefore when we could no longer forbear we thought it good
to be left at Athens alone
and sent Timotheus our brother and minister of God and our
fellowlabourer in the gospel of Christ to establish you and
to comfort you concerning your faith
that no man should be moved by these afflictions for
yourselves know that we are appointed thereunto.
for verily when we were with you we told you before that we
should suffer tribulation even as it came to pass and ye
know.
for this cause when I could no longer forbear I sent to know
your faith lest by some means the tempter have tempted you
and our labour be in vain.
but now when Timotheus came from you unto us and brought us
good tidings of your faith and charity and that ye have good
remembrance of us always desiring greatly to see us as we
also to see you
therefore brethren we were comforted over you in all our
affliction and distress by your faith
for now we live if ye stand fast in the lord.
for what thanks can we render to God again for you for all
the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God
night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your face
and might perfect that which is lacking in your faith?
now God himself and our father and our lord Jesus Christ
direct our way unto you.
and the lord make you to increase and abound in love one
toward another and toward all men even as we do toward you
to the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness
before God even our father at the coming of our lord Jesus
Christ with all his saints.
furthermore then we beseech you brethren and exhort you by
the lord Jesus that as ye have received of us how ye ought to
walk and to please God so ye would abound more and more.
for ye know what commandments we gave you by the lord Jesus.
for this is the will of God even your sanctification that ye
should abstain from fornication
that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honour
not in the lust of concupiscence even as the Gentiles which
know not God
that no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter
because that the lord is the avenger of all such as we also
have forewarned you and testified.
for God hath not called us unto uncleanness but unto
holiness.
he therefore that despiseth despiseth not man but God who
hath also given unto us his holy spirit.
but as touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto
you for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another.
and indeed ye do it toward all the brethren which are in all
Macedonia but we beseech you brethren that ye increase more
and more
and that ye study to be quiet and to do your own business
and to work with your own hands as we commanded you
that ye may walk honestly toward them that are without and
that ye may have lack of nothing.
but I would not have you to be ignorant brethren concerning
them which are asleep that ye sorrow not even as others
which have no hope.
for if we believe that Jesus died and rose again even so them
also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.
for this we say unto you by the word of the lord that we
which are alive and remain unto the coming of the lord shall
not prevent them which are asleep.
for the lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout
with the voice of the archangel and with the trump of God
and the dead in Christ shall rise first
then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds to meet the lord in the air and so
shall we ever be with the lord.
wherefore comfort one another with these words.
but of the times and the seasons brethren ye have no need
that I write unto you.
for yourselves know perfectly that the day of the lord so
cometh as a thief in the night.
for when they shall say peace and safety then sudden
destruction cometh upon them as travail upon a woman with
child and they shall not escape.
but ye brethren are not in darkness that that day should
overtake you as a thief.
ye are all the children of light and the children of the day
we are not of the night nor of darkness.
therefore let us not sleep as do others but let us watch and
be sober.
for they that sleep sleep in the night and they that be
drunken are drunken in the night.
but let us who are of the day be sober putting on the
breastplate of faith and love and for an helmet the hope of
salvation.
for God hath not appointed us to wrath but to obtain
salvation by our lord Jesus Christ
who died for us that whether we wake or sleep we should
live together with him.
wherefore comfort yourselves together and edify one another
even as also ye do.
and we beseech you brethren to know them which labour among
you and are over you in the lord and admonish you
and to esteem them very highly in love for their work s sake.
and be at peace among yourselves.
now we exhort you brethren warn them that are unruly
comfort the feebleminded support the weak be patient toward
all men.
see that none render evil for evil unto any man but ever
follow that which is good both among yourselves and to all
men.
rejoice evermore.
pray without ceasing.
in every thing give thanks for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus concerning you.
quench not the spirit.
despise not prophesyings.
prove all things hold fast that which is good.
abstain from all appearance of evil.
and the very God of peace sanctify you wholly and I pray God
your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our lord Jesus Christ.
faithful is he that calleth you who also will do it.
brethren pray for us.
greet all the brethren with an holy Kiss.
I charge you by the lord that this epistle be read unto all
the holy brethren.
the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.
Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus unto the church of the
Thessalonians in God our father and the lord Jesus Christ
grace unto you and peace from God our father and the lord
Jesus Christ.
we are bound to thank God always for you brethren as it is
meet because that your faith groweth exceedingly and the
charity of every one of you all toward each other aboundeth
so that we ourselves glory in you in the churches of God for
your patience and faith in all your persecutions and
tribulations that ye endure
which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God
that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God for which
ye also suffer
seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you
and to you who are troubled rest with us when the lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven with his Mighty angels
in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God
and that obey not the gospel of our lord Jesus Christ
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the lord and from the glory of his power
when he shall come to be glorified in his saints and to be
admired in all them that believe because our testimony among
you was believed in that day.
wherefore also we pray always for you that our God would
count you worthy of this calling and fulfil all the good
pleasure of his goodness and the work of faith with power
that the name of our lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in
you and ye in him according to the grace of our God and the
lord Jesus Christ.
now we beseech you brethren by the coming of our lord Jesus
Christ and by our gathering together unto him
that ye be not soon shaken in mind or be troubled Neither by
spirit nor by word nor by letter as from us as that the day
of Christ is at hand.
let no man deceive you by any means for that day shall not
come except there come a falling away first and that man of
Sin be revealed the son of perdition
who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called
God or that is worshipped so that he as God sitteth in the
temple of God shewing himself that he is God.
remember ye not that when I was yet with you I told you
these things?
and now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in
his time.
for the mystery of iniquity doth already work only he who now
letteth will let until he be taken out of the way.
and then shall that wicked be revealed whom the lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth and shall destroy with
the brightness of his coming
even him whose coming is after the working of Satan with all
power and signs and lying wonders
and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that
perish because they received not the love of the truth that
they might be saved.
and for this cause God shall send them strong delusion that
they should believe a lie
that they all might be damned who believed not the truth but
had pleasure in unrighteousness.
but we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you brethren
beloved of the lord because God hath from the beginning
chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the spirit
and belief of the truth
whereunto he called you by our gospel to the obtaining of the
glory of our lord Jesus Christ.
therefore brethren stand fast and hold the traditions which
ye have been taught whether by word or our epistle.
now our lord Jesus Christ himself and God even our father
which hath loved us and hath given us everlasting consolation
and good hope through grace
comfort your hearts and stablish you in every good word and
work.
finally brethren pray for us that the word of the lord may
have free course and be glorified even as it is with you
and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men
for all men have not faith.
but the lord is faithful who shall stablish you and keep you
from evil.
and we have confidence in the lord touching you that ye both
do and will do the things which we command you.
and the lord direct your hearts into the love of God and into
the patient waiting for Christ.
now we command you brethren in the name of our lord Jesus
Christ that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that
walketh disorderly and not after the tradition which he
received of us.
for yourselves know how ye ought to follow us for we behaved
not ourselves disorderly among you
Neither did we eat any man s bread for nought but wrought
with labour and travail night and day that we might not be
chargeable to any of you
not because we have not power but to make ourselves an
ensample unto you to follow us.
for even when we were with you this we commanded you that if
any would not work Neither should he eat.
for we hear that there are some which walk among you
disorderly working not at all but are busybodies.
now them that are such we command and exhort by our lord Jesus
Christ that with quietness they work and eat their own
bread.
but ye brethren be not weary in well doing.
and if any man obey not our word by this epistle note that
man and have no company with him that he may be ashamed.
yet count him not as an enemy but admonish him as a brother.
now the lord of peace himself give you peace always by all
means. the lord be with you all.
the salutation of Paul with mine own hand which is the token
in every epistle so I write.
the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
Paul an apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our
saviour and lord Jesus Christ which is our hope
unto Timothy my own son in the faith grace mercy and
peace from God our father and Jesus Christ our lord.
as I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus when I went into
Macedonia that thou mightest charge some that they teach no
other doctrine
Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies which
minister questions rather than godly edifying which is in
faith so do.
now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart
and of a good conscience and of faith unfeigned
from which some having swerved have turned aside unto vain
jangling
desiring to be teachers of the law understanding Neither what
they say nor whereof they affirm.
but we know that the law is good if a man use it lawfully
knowing this that the law is not made for a righteous man
but for the lawless and disobedient for the ungodly and for
sinners for unholy and profane for murderers of fathers and
murderers of mothers for manslayers
for whoremongers for them that defile themselves with
mankind for menstealers for liars for perjured persons and
if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound
doctrine
according to the glorious gospel of the blessed God which was
committed to my trust.
and I thank Christ Jesus our lord who hath enabled me for
that he counted me faithful putting me into the ministry
who was before a blasphemer and a persecutor and injurious
but I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.
and the grace of our lord was exceeding abundant with faith
and love which is in Christ Jesus.
this is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners of whom I Am
chief.
howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy that in me first
Jesus Christ might shew forth all longsuffering for a pattern
to them which should hereafter believe on him to life
everlasting.
now unto the king eternal immortal invisible the only wise
God be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
this charge I commit unto thee son Timothy according to the
prophecies which went before on thee that thou by them
mightest war a good warfare
holding faith and a good conscience which some having put
away concerning faith have made shipwreck
of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander whom I have delivered unto
Satan that they may learn not to blaspheme.
I exhort therefore that first of all supplications
prayers intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all
men
for kings and for all that are in authority that we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
saviour
who will have all men to be saved and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth.
for there is one God and one mediator between God and men
the man Christ Jesus
who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due
time.
whereunto I Am ordained a preacher and an apostle I speak
the truth in Christ and lie not a teacher of the Gentiles
in faith and verity.
I will therefore that men pray every where lifting up holy
hands without wrath and doubting.
in like manner also that women adorn themselves in modest
apparel with shamefacedness and sobriety not with broided
hair or gold or pearls or costly array
but which becometh women professing godliness with good
works.
let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.
but I suffer not a woman to teach nor to usurp authority over
the man but to be in silence.
for Adam was first formed then Eve.
and Adam was not deceived but the woman being deceived was in
the transgression.
notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing if they
continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety.
this is a true saying if a man desire the office of a Bishop
he desireth a good work.
a Bishop then must be blameless the husband of one wife
vigilant sober of good behaviour given to hospitality apt
to teach
not given to wine no striker not greedy of filthy lucre but
patient not a brawler not covetous
one that ruleth well his own house having his children in
subjection with all gravity
 for if a man know not how to rule his own house how shall he
take care of the church of God?
not a novice lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the
condemnation of the devil.
moreover he must have a good report of them which are without
lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.
likewise must the deacons be grave not doubletongued not
given to Much wine not greedy of filthy lucre
holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.
and let these also first be proved then let them use the
office of a deacon being found blameless.
even so must their wives be grave not slanderers sober
faithful in all things.
let the deacons be the husbands of one wife ruling their
children and their own houses well.
for they that have used the office of a deacon well purchase
to themselves a good degree and great boldness in the faith
which is in Christ Jesus.
these things write I unto thee hoping to come unto thee
shortly
but if I tarry long that thou mayest know how thou oughtest
to behave thyself in the house of God which is the church of
the living God the pillar and ground of the truth.
and without controversy great is the mystery of godliness God
was manifest in the flesh justified in the spirit seen of
angels preached unto the Gentiles believed on in the world
received up into glory.
now the spirit speaketh expressly that in the latter times
some shall depart from the faith giving heed to seducing
spirits and doctrines of devils
speaking lies in hypocrisy having their conscience seared
with a hot Iron
forbidding to marry and commanding to abstain from meats
which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of
them which believe and know the truth.
for every creature of God is good and nothing to be refused
if it be received with thanksgiving
for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.
if thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things thou
shalt be a good minister of Jesus Christ nourished up in the
words of faith and of good doctrine whereunto thou hast
attained.
but refuse profane and old wives fables and exercise thyself
rather unto godliness.
for bodily exercise profiteth little but godliness is
profitable unto all things having promise of the life that
now is and of that which is to come.
this is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation.
for therefore we both labour and suffer reproach because we
trust in the living God who is the saviour of all men
specially of those that believe.
these things command and teach.
let no man despise thy youth but be thou an example of the
believers in word in conversation in charity in spirit in
faith in purity.
till I come give attendance to reading to exhortation to
doctrine.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee which was given thee by
prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.
meditate upon these things give thyself wholly to them that
thy profiting may appear to all.
take heed unto thyself and unto the doctrine continue in
them for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself and them
that hear thee.
rebuke not an elder but intreat him as a father and the
younger men as brethren
the elder women as mothers the younger as sisters with all
purity.
honour widows that are widows indeed.
but if any widow have children or nephews let them learn
first to shew piety at home and to requite their parents for
that is good and acceptable before God.
now she that is a widow indeed and desolate trusteth in God
and continueth in supplications and prayers night and day.
but she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth.
and these things give in charge that they may be blameless.
but if any provide not for his own and specially for those of
his own house he hath denied the faith and is worse than an
infidel.
let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore
years old having been the wife of one man.
well reported of for good works if she have brought up
children if she have lodged strangers if she have washed the
saints feet if she have relieved the afflicted if she have
diligently followed every good work.
but the younger widows refuse for when they have begun to wax
wanton against Christ they will marry
having damnation because they have cast off their first
faith.
and withal they learn to be idle wandering about from house
to house and not only idle but tattlers also and busybodies
speaking things which they ought not.
I will therefore that the younger women marry bear children
guide the house give none occasion to the adversary to speak
reproachfully.
for some are already turned aside after Satan.
if any man or woman that believeth have widows let them
relieve them and let not the church be charged that it may
relieve them that are widows indeed.
let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honour especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.
for the scripture saith thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn. and the labourer is worthy of his
reward.
against an elder receive not an accusation but before two or
three witnesses.
them that Sin rebuke before all that others also may fear.
I charge thee before God and the lord Jesus Christ and the
elect angels that thou observe these things without
preferring one before another doing nothing by partiality.
lay hands suddenly on no man Neither be partaker of other
men s sins keep thyself pure.
drink no longer water but use a little wine for thy stomach s
sake and thine often infirmities.
some men s sins are open beforehand going before to judgment
and some men they follow after.
likewise also the good works of some are manifest beforehand
and they that are otherwise cannot be hid.
let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own
masters worthy of all honour that the name of God and his
doctrine be not blasphemed.
and they that have believing masters let them not despise
them because they are brethren but rather do them service
because they are faithful and beloved partakers of the
benefit. these things teach and exhort.
if any man teach otherwise and consent not to wholesome
words even the words of our lord Jesus Christ and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness
he is proud knowing nothing but doting about questions and
strifes of words whereof cometh envy strife railings evil
surmisings
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds and destitute of
the truth supposing that gain is godliness from such
withdraw thyself.
but godliness with contentment is great gain.
for we brought nothing into this world and it is certain we
can carry nothing out.
and having food and raiment let us be therewith content.
but they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men in
destruction and perdition.
for the love of money is the root of all evil which while
some coveted after they have erred from the faith and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
but thou O man of God flee these things and follow after
righteousness godliness faith love patience meekness.
fight the good fight of faith lay hold on eternal life
whereunto thou art also called and hast professed a good
profession before many witnesses.
I give thee charge in the sight of God who quickeneth all
things and before Christ Jesus who before Pontius Pilate
witnessed a good confession
that thou keep this commandment without spot unrebukable
until the appearing of our lord Jesus Christ
which in his times he shall shew who is the blessed and only
Potentate the king of kings and lord of lords
who only hath immortality dwelling in the light which no man
can approach unto whom no man hath seen nor can see to whom
be honour and power everlasting. Amen.
charge them that are rich in this world that they be not
highminded nor trust in uncertain Riches but in the living
God who giveth us richly all things to enjoy
that they do good that they be rich in good works ready to
distribute willing to communicate
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against
the time to come that they may lay hold on eternal life.
O Timothy keep that which is committed to thy trust avoiding
profane and vain babblings and oppositions of science falsely
so called
which some professing have erred concerning the faith. grace
be with thee. Amen.
Paul an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God according
to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus
to Timothy my dearly beloved son grace mercy and peace
from God the father and Christ Jesus our lord.
I thank God whom I serve from my forefathers with pure
conscience that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in
my prayers night and day
greatly desiring to see thee being mindful of thy tears that
I may be filled with joy
when I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in
thee which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois and thy
mother Eunice and I Am persuaded that in thee also.
wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift
of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.
for God hath not given us the spirit of fear but of power
and of love and of a sound mind.
be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our lord
nor of me his prisoner but be thou partaker of the
afflictions of the gospel according to the power of God
who hath saved us and called us with an holy calling not
according to our works but according to his own purpose and
grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world
began
but is now made manifest by the appearing of our saviour Jesus
Christ who hath abolished death and hath brought life and
immortality to light through the gospel
whereunto I Am appointed a preacher and an apostle and a
teacher of the Gentiles.
for the which cause I also suffer these things nevertheless I
Am not ashamed for I know whom I have believed and Am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed
unto him against that day.
hold fast the form of sound words which thou hast heard of
me in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
that good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the holy
ghost which dwelleth in us.
this thou knowest that all they which are in Asia be turned
away from me of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.
the lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus for he oft
refreshed me and was not ashamed of my chain
but when he was in Rome he sought me out very diligently
and found me.
the lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the lord in
that day and in how many things he ministered unto me at
Ephesus thou knowest very well.
thou therefore my son be strong in the grace that is in
Christ Jesus.
and the things that thou hast heard of me among many
witnesses the same commit thou to faithful men who shall be
able to teach others also.
thou therefore endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ.
no man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of
this life that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a
soldier.
and if a man also strive for masteries yet is he not crowned
except he strive lawfully.
the husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the
fruits.
consider what I say and the lord give thee understanding in
all things.
remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised
from the dead according to my gospel
wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer even unto bonds
but the word of God is not bound.
therefore I endure all things for the elect s sakes that they
may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with
eternal glory.
it is a faithful saying for if we be dead with him we shall
also live with him
if we suffer we shall also reign with him if we deny him he
also will deny us
if we believe not yet he abideth faithful he cannot deny
himself.
of these things put them in remembrance charging them before
the lord that they strive not about words to no profit but to
the subverting of the hearers.
study to shew thyself approved unto God a workman that
needeth not to be ashamed rightly dividing the word of truth.
but shun profane and vain babblings for they will increase
unto more ungodliness.
and their word will eat as doth a canker of whom is Hymenaeus
and Philetus
who concerning the truth have erred saying that the
resurrection is past already and overthrow the faith of some.
nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure having this
seal the lord knoweth them that are his. and let every one
that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.
but in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of
Silver but also of wood and of earth and some to honour and
some to dishonour.
if a man therefore purge himself from these he shall be a
vessel unto honour sanctified and meet for the Master s use
and prepared unto every good work.
flee also youthful lusts but follow righteousness faith
charity peace with them that call on the lord out of a pure
heart.
but foolish and unlearned questions avoid knowing that they
do gender strifes.
and the servant of the lord must not strive but be gentle
unto all men apt to teach patient
in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of
the truth
and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
devil who are taken captive by him at his will.
this know also that in the last days perilous times shall
come.
for men shall be lovers of their own selves covetous
boasters proud blasphemers disobedient to parents
unthankful unholy
without natural affection trucebreakers false accusers
incontinent fierce despisers of those that are good
traitors heady highminded lovers of pleasures more than
lovers of God
having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof
from such turn away.
for of this sort are they which creep into houses and lead
captive silly women laden with sins led away with divers
lusts
ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth.
now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses so do these also
resist the truth men of corrupt minds reprobate concerning
the faith.
but they shall proceed no further for their folly shall be
manifest unto all men as their s also was.
but thou hast fully known my doctrine manner of life
purpose faith longsuffering charity patience
persecutions afflictions which came unto me at Antioch at
Iconium at Lystra what persecutions I endured but out of
them all the lord delivered me.
yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution.
but evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse
deceiving and being deceived.
but continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and
hast been assured of knowing of whom thou hast learned them
and that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith
which is in Christ Jesus.
all scripture is given by inspiration of God and is
profitable for doctrine for reproof for correction for
instruction in righteousness
that the man of God may be perfect throughly furnished unto
all good works.
I charge thee therefore before God and the lord Jesus Christ
who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and
his kingdom
preach the word be instant in season out of season reprove
rebuke exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine.
for the time will come when they will not endure sound
doctrine but after their own lusts shall they heap to
themselves teachers having itching ears
and they shall turn away their ears from the truth and shall
be turned unto fables.
but watch thou in all things endure afflictions do the work
of an evangelist make full proof of thy ministry.
for I Am now ready to be offered and the time of my departure
is at hand.
I have fought a good fight I have finished my course I have
kept the faith
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness
which the lord the righteous judge shall give me at that
day and not to me only but unto all them also that love his
appearing.
do thy diligence to come shortly unto me
for Demas hath forsaken me having loved this present world
and is departed unto Thessalonica Crescens to Galatia Titus
unto Dalmatia.
only Luke is with me. take Mark and bring him with thee for
he is profitable to me for the ministry.
and Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus.
the cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus when thou comest
bring with thee and the books but especially the parchments.
Alexander the coppersmith did me Much evil the lord reward
him according to his works
of whom be thou ware also for he hath greatly withstood our
words.
at my first answer no man stood with me but all men forsook
me I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge.
notwithstanding the lord stood with me and strengthened me
that by me the preaching might be fully known and that all
the Gentiles might hear and I was delivered out of the mouth
of the lion.
and the lord shall deliver me from every evil work and will
preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom to whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.
salute Prisca and Aquila and the household of Onesiphorus.
Erastus abode at Corinth but Trophimus have I left at Miletum
sick.
do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee
and Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brethren.
the lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. grace be with you.
Amen.
Paul a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ
according to the faith of God s elect and the acknowledging
of the truth which is after godliness
in hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie promised
before the world began
but hath in due times manifested his word through preaching
which is committed unto me according to the commandment of God
our saviour
to Titus mine own son after the common faith grace mercy
and peace from God the father and the lord Jesus Christ our
saviour.
for this cause left I thee in Crete that thou shouldest set
in order the things that are wanting and ordain elders in
every city as I had appointed thee
if any be blameless the husband of one wife having faithful
children not accused of riot or unruly.
for a Bishop must be blameless as the steward of God not
selfwilled not soon angry not given to wine no striker not
given to filthy lucre
but a lover of hospitality a lover of good men sober just
holy temperate
holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught that he
may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince
the gainsayers.
for there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers
specially they of the circumcision
whose mouths must be stopped who subvert whole houses
teaching things which they ought not for filthy lucre s sake.
one of themselves even a prophet of their own said the
Cretians are alway liars evil beasts slow bellies.
this witness is true. wherefore rebuke them sharply that they
may be sound in the faith
not giving heed to Jewish fables and commandments of men
that turn from the truth.
unto the pure all things are pure but unto them that are
defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure but even their mind
and conscience is defiled.
they profess that they know God but in works they deny him
being abominable and disobedient and unto every good work
reprobate.
but speak thou the things which become sound doctrine
that the aged men be sober grave temperate sound in faith
in charity in patience.
the aged women likewise that they be in behaviour as becometh
holiness not false accusers not given to Much wine teachers
of good things
that they may teach the young women to be sober to love their
husbands to love their children
to be discreet chaste keepers at home good obedient to
their own husbands that the word of God be not blasphemed.
young men likewise exhort to be sober minded.
in all things shewing thyself a pattern of good works in
doctrine shewing uncorruptness gravity sincerity
sound speech that cannot be condemned that he that is of the
contrary part may be ashamed having no evil thing to say of
you.
exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters and to
please them well in all things not answering again
not purloining but shewing all good fidelity that they may
adorn the doctrine of God our saviour in all things.
for the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to
all men
teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts we
should live soberly righteously and godly in this present
world
looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of
the great God and our saviour Jesus Christ
who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all
iniquity and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous
of good works.
these things speak and exhort and rebuke with all authority.
let no man despise thee.
put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers
to obey magistrates to be ready to every good work
to speak evil of no man to be no brawlers but gentle
shewing all meekness unto all men.
for we ourselves also were sometimes foolish disobedient
deceived serving divers lusts and pleasures living in malice
and envy hateful and hating one another.
but after that the kindness and love of God our saviour toward
man appeared
not by works of righteousness which we have done but
according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of
regeneration and renewing of the holy ghost
which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our
saviour
that being justified by his grace we should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life.
this is a faithful saying and these things I will that thou
affirm constantly that they which have believed in God might
be careful to maintain good works. these things are good and
profitable unto men.
but avoid foolish questions and genealogies and contentions
and strivings about the law for they are unprofitable and
vain.
a man that is an heretick after the first and second
admonition reject
knowing that he that is such is subverted and sinneth being
condemned of himself.
when I shall send Artemas unto thee or Tychicus be diligent
to come unto me to Nicopolis for I have determined there to
winter.
bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey
diligently that nothing be wanting unto them.
and let our s also learn to maintain good works for necessary
uses that they be not unfruitful.
all that are with me salute thee. greet them that love us in
the faith. grace be with you all. Amen.
Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ and Timothy our brother
unto Philemon our dearly beloved and fellowlabourer
and to our beloved Apphia and Archippus our fellowsoldier
and to the church in thy house
grace to you and peace from God our father and the lord
Jesus Christ.
I thank my God making mention of thee always in my prayers
hearing of thy love and faith which thou hast toward the lord
Jesus and toward all saints
that the communication of thy faith may become effectual by
the acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in
Christ Jesus.
for we have great joy and consolation in thy love because the
bowels of the saints are refreshed by thee brother.
wherefore though I might be Much bold in Christ to enjoin
thee that which is convenient
yet for love s sake I rather beseech thee being such an one
as Paul the aged and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
I beseech thee for my son Onesimus whom I have begotten in my
bonds
which in time past was to thee unprofitable but now
profitable to thee and to me
whom I have sent again thou therefore receive him that is
mine own bowels
whom I would have retained with me that in thy stead he might
have ministered unto me in the bonds of the gospel
but without thy mind would I do nothing that thy benefit
should not be as it were of necessity but willingly.
for perhaps he therefore departed for a season that thou
shouldest receive him for ever
not now as a servant but above a servant a brother beloved
specially to me but how Much more unto thee both in the
flesh and in the lord?
if thou count me therefore a partner receive him as myself.
if he hath wronged thee or oweth thee ought put that on mine
account
I Paul have written it with mine own hand I will repay it
albeit I do not say to thee how thou owest unto me even thine
own self besides.
yea brother let me have joy of thee in the lord refresh my
bowels in the lord.
having confidence in thy obedience I wrote unto thee knowing
that thou wilt also do more than I say.
but withal prepare me also a lodging for I trust that through
your prayers I shall be given unto you.
there salute thee Epaphras my fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus
Marcus Aristarchus Demas Lucas my fellowlabourers.
the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.
God who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time
past unto the fathers by the prophets
hath in these last days spoken unto us by his son whom he
hath appointed heir of all things by whom also he made the
worlds
who being the brightness of his glory and the express image
of his person and upholding all things by the word of his
power when he had by himself purged our sins sat down on the
right hand of the majesty on high
being made so Much better than the angels as he hath by
inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they.
for unto which of the angels said he at any time thou art my
son this day have I begotten thee? and again I will be to
him a father and he shall be to me a son?
and again when he bringeth in the firstbegotten into the
world he saith and let all the angels of God worship him.
and of the angels he saith who maketh his angels spirits and
his ministers a flame of fire.
but unto the son he saith thy throne O God is for ever and
ever a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy
kingdom.
thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity therefore
God even thy God hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness
above thy fellows.
and thou lord in the beginning hast laid the foundation of
the earth and the heavens are the works of thine hands
they shall perish but thou remainest and they all shall wax
old as doth a garment
and as a vesture shalt thou fold them up and they shall be
changed but thou art the same and thy years shall not fail.
but to which of the angels said he at any time sit on my
right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool?
are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister
for them who shall be heirs of salvation?
therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things
which we have heard lest at any time we should let them slip.
for if the word spoken by angels was stedfast and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of
reward
how shall we escape if we Neglect so great salvation which
at the first began to be spoken by the lord and was confirmed
unto us by them that heard him
God also bearing them witness both with signs and wonders
and with divers miracles and gifts of the holy ghost
according to his own will?
for unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to
come whereof we speak.
but one in a certain place testified saying what is man
that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man that thou
visitest him?
thou madest him a little lower than the angels thou crownedst
him with glory and honour and didst set him over the works of
thy hands
thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet. for in
that he put all in subjection under him he left nothing that
is not put under him. but now we see not yet all things put
under him.
but we see Jesus who was made a little lower than the angels
for the suffering of death crowned with glory and honour
that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.
for it became him for whom are all things and by whom are
all things in bringing many sons unto glory to make the
captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.
for both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are
all of one for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren
saying I will declare thy name unto my brethren in the midst
of the church will I sing praise unto thee.
and again I will put my trust in him. and again behold I and
the children which God hath given me.
forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and
blood he also himself likewise took part of the same that
through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death that is the devil
and deliver them who through fear of death were all their
lifetime subject to bondage.
for verily he took not on him the nature of angels but he
took on him the seed of Abraham.
wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto
his brethren that he might be a merciful and faithful high
priest in things pertaining to God to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people.
for in that he himself hath suffered being tempted he is able
to succour them that are tempted.
wherefore holy brethren partakers of the heavenly calling
consider the apostle and high priest of our profession Christ
Jesus
who was faithful to him that appointed him as also Moses was
faithful in all his house.
for this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses
inasmuch as he who hath builded the house hath more honour
than the house.
for every house is builded by some man but he that built all
things is God.
and Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant
for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after
but Christ as a son over his own house whose house are we if
we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm
unto the end.
wherefore as the holy ghost saith to day if ye will hear his
voice
harden not your hearts as in the provocation in the day of
temptation in the wilderness
when your fathers tempted me proved me and saw my works
forty years.
wherefore I was grieved with that generation and said they
do alway err in their heart and they have not known my ways.
so I sware in my wrath they shall not enter into my rest.
take heed brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart
of unbelief in departing from the living God.
but exhort one another daily while it is called to day lest
any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin.
for we are made partakers of Christ if we hold the beginning
of our confidence stedfast unto the end
while it is said to day if ye will hear his voice harden not
your hearts as in the provocation.
for some when they had heard did provoke howbeit not all
that came out of Egypt by Moses.
but with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them
that had sinned whose carcases fell in the wilderness?
and to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest
but to them that believed not?
so we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief.
let us therefore fear lest a promise being left us of
entering into his rest any of you should seem to come short
of it.
for unto us was the gospel preached as well as unto them but
the word preached did not profit them not being mixed with
faith in them that heard it.
for we which have believed do enter into rest as he said as
I have sworn in my wrath if they shall enter into my rest
although the works were finished from the foundation of the
world.
for he spake in a certain place of the seventh day on this
wise and God did rest the seventh day from all his works.
and in this place again if they shall enter into my rest.
seeing therefore it remaineth that some must enter therein
and they to whom it was first preached entered not in because
of unbelief
again he limiteth a certain day saying in David to day
after so long a time as it is said to day if ye will hear
his voice harden not your hearts.
for if Jesus had given them rest then would he not afterward
have spoken of another day.
there remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God.
for he that is entered into his rest he also hath ceased from
his own works as God did from his.
let us labour therefore to enter into that rest lest any man
fall after the same example of unbelief.
for the word of God is quick and powerful and sharper than
any twoedged sword piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit and of the joints and marrow and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his
sight but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of
him with whom we have to do.
seeing then that we have a great high priest that is passed
into the heavens Jesus the son of God let us hold fast our
profession.
for we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with
the feeling of our infirmities but was in all points tempted
like as we are yet without Sin.
let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace that we
may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need.
for every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men
in things pertaining to God that he may offer both gifts and
sacrifices for sins
who can have compassion on the ignorant and on them that are
out of the way for that he himself also is compassed with
infirmity.
and by reason hereof he ought as for the people so also for
himself to offer for sins.
and no man taketh this honour unto himself but he that is
called of God as was Aaron.
so also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high
priest but he that said unto him thou art my son to day
have I begotten thee.
as he saith also in another place thou art a priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec.
who in the days of his flesh when he had offered up prayers
and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that
was able to save him from death and was heard in that he
feared
though he were a son yet learned he obedience by the things
which he suffered
and being made perfect he became the author of eternal
salvation unto all them that obey him
called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec.
of whom we have many things to say and hard to be uttered
seeing ye are dull of hearing.
for when for the time ye ought to be teachers ye have need
that one teach you again which be the first principles of the
oracles of God and are become such as have need of milk and
not of strong meat.
for every one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of
righteousness for he is a babe.
but strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age even
those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil.
therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ
let us go on unto perfection not laying again the foundation
of repentance from dead works and of faith toward God
of the doctrine of baptisms and of laying on of hands and of
resurrection of the dead and of eternal judgment.
and this will we do if God permit.
for it is impossible for those who were once enlightened and
have tasted of the heavenly gift and were made partakers of
the holy ghost
and have tasted the good word of God and the powers of the
world to come
if they shall fall away to renew them again unto repentance
seeing they crucify to themselves the son of God afresh and
put him to an open shame.
for the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon
it and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is
dressed receiveth blessing from God
but that which beareth thorns and briers is rejected and is
nigh unto cursing whose end is to be burned.
but beloved we are persuaded better things of you and
things that accompany salvation though we thus speak.
for God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of
love which ye have shewed toward his name in that ye have
ministered to the saints and do minister.
and we desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence
to the full assurance of hope unto the end
that ye be not slothful but followers of them who through
faith and patience inherit the promises.
for when God made promise to Abraham because he could swear
by no greater he sware by himself
saying surely blessing I will bless thee and multiplying I
will multiply thee.
and so after he had patiently endured he obtained the
promise.
for men verily swear by the greater and an oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife.
wherein God willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of
promise the immutability of his counsel confirmed it by an
oath
that by two immutable things in which it was impossible for
God to lie we might have a strong consolation who have fled
for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us
which hope we have as an anchor of the soul both sure and
stedfast and which entereth into that within the veil
whither the forerunner is for us entered even Jesus made an
high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.
for this Melchisedec king of Salem priest of the most high
God who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the
kings and blessed him
to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all first being by
interpretation king of righteousness and after that also king
of Salem which is king of peace
without father without mother without descent having
Neither beginning of days nor end of life but made like unto
the son of God abideth a priest continually.
now consider how great this man was unto whom even the
patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils.
and verily they that are of the sons of Levi who receive the
office of the priesthood have a commandment to take tithes of
the people according to the law that is of their brethren
though they come out of the loins of Abraham
but he whose descent is not counted from them received tithes
of Abraham and blessed him that had the promises.
and without all contradiction the less is blessed of the
better.
and here men that die receive tithes but there he receiveth
them of whom it is witnessed that he liveth.
and as I may so say Levi also who receiveth tithes payed
tithes in Abraham.
for he was yet in the loins of his father when Melchisedec
met him.
if therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood for
under it the people received the law what further need was
there that another priest should rise after the order of
Melchisedec and not be called after the order of Aaron?
for the priesthood being changed there is made of necessity a
change also of the law.
for he of whom these things are spoken pertaineth to another
tribe of which no man gave attendance at the altar.
for it is evident that our lord sprang out of Juda of which
tribe Moses spake nothing concerning priesthood.
and it is yet far more evident for that after the similitude
of Melchisedec there ariseth another priest
who is made not after the law of a carnal commandment but
after the power of an endless life.
for he testifieth thou art a priest for ever after the order
of Melchisedec.
for there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going
before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.
for the law made nothing perfect but the bringing in of a
better hope did by the which we draw nigh unto God.
and inasmuch as not without an oath he was made priest
 for those priests were made without an oath but this with an
oath by him that said unto him the lord sware and will not
repent thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec
by so Much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament.
and they truly were many priests because they were not
suffered to continue by reason of death
but this man because he continueth ever hath an unchangeable
priesthood.
wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that
come unto God by him seeing he ever liveth to make
intercession for them.
for such an high priest became us who is holy harmless
undefiled separate from sinners and made higher than the
heavens
who needeth not daily as those high priests to offer up
sacrifice first for his own sins and then for the people s
for this he did once when he offered up himself.
for the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity but
the word of the oath which was since the law maketh the son
who is consecrated for evermore.
now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum we
have such an high priest who is set on the right hand of the
throne of the majesty in the heavens
a minister of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle which
the lord pitched and not man.
for every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and
sacrifices wherefore it is of necessity that this man have
somewhat also to offer.
for if he were on earth he should not be a priest seeing
that there are priests that offer gifts according to the law
who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things as
Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the
tabernacle for see saith he that thou make all things
according to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount.
but now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry by how
Much also he is the mediator of a better covenant which was
established upon better promises.
for if that first covenant had been faultless then should no
place have been sought for the second.
for finding fault with them he saith behold the days come
saith the lord when I will make a new covenant with the house
of Israel and with the house of Judah
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers
in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of
the land of Egypt because they continued not in my covenant
and I regarded them not saith the lord.
for this is the covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel after those days saith the lord I will put my laws
into their mind and write them in their hearts and I will be
to them a God and they shall be to me a people
and they shall not teach every man his neighbour and every
man his brother saying know the lord for all shall know me
from the least to the greatest.
for I will be merciful to their unrighteousness and their
sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.
in that he saith a new covenant he hath made the first old.
now that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish
away.
then verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine
service and a worldly sanctuary.
for there was a tabernacle made the first wherein was the
candlestick and the table and the shewbread which is called
the sanctuary.
and after the second veil the tabernacle which is called the
holiest of all
which had the golden censer and the ark of the covenant
overlaid round about with gold wherein was the golden pot
that had Manna and Aaron s rod that budded and the tables of
the covenant
and over it the Cherubims of glory shadowing the mercyseat of
which we cannot now speak particularly.
now when these things were thus ordained the priests went
always into the first tabernacle accomplishing the service of
God.
but into the second went the high priest alone once every
year not without blood which he offered for himself and for
the errors of the people
the holy ghost this signifying that the way into the holiest
of all was not yet made manifest while as the first
tabernacle was yet standing
which was a figure for the time then present in which were
offered both gifts and sacrifices that could not make him
that did the service perfect as pertaining to the conscience
which stood only in meats and drinks and divers washings and
carnal ordinances imposed on them until the time of
reformation.
but Christ being come an high priest of good things to come
by a greater and more perfect tabernacle not made with hands
that is to say not of this building
Neither by the blood of goats and calves but by his own blood
he entered in once into the holy place having obtained
eternal redemption for us.
for if the blood of bulls and of goats and the ashes of an
heifer sprinkling the unclean sanctifieth to the purifying of
the flesh
how Much more shall the blood of Christ who through the
eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God purge your
conscience from dead works to serve the living God?
and for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament
that by means of death for the redemption of the
transgressions that were under the first testament they which
are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.
for where a testament is there must also of necessity be the
death of the testator.
for a testament is of force after men are dead otherwise it
is of no strength at all while the testator liveth.
whereupon Neither the first testament was dedicated without
blood.
for when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people
according to the law he took the blood of calves and of
goats with water and scarlet wool and hyssop and sprinkled
both the book and all the people
saying this is the blood of the testament which God hath
enjoined unto you.
moreover he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle and all
the vessels of the ministry.
and almost all things are by the law purged with blood and
without shedding of blood is no remission.
it was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the
heavens should be purified with these but the heavenly things
themselves with better sacrifices than these.
for Christ is not entered into the holy places made with
hands which are the figures of the true but into heaven
itself now to appear in the presence of God for us
nor yet that he should offer himself often as the high priest
entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others
for then must he often have suffered since the foundation of
the world but now once in the end of the world hath he
appeared to put away Sin by the sacrifice of himself.
and as it is appointed unto men once to die but after this
the judgment
so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many and unto
them that look for him shall he appear the second time without
Sin unto salvation.
for the law having a shadow of good things to come and not
the very image of the things can never with those sacrifices
which they offered year by year continually make the comers
thereunto perfect.
for then would they not have ceased to be offered? because
that the worshippers once purged should have had no more
conscience of sins.
but in those sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of
sins every year.
for it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats
should take away sins.
wherefore when he cometh into the world he saith sacrifice
and offering thou wouldest not but a body hast thou prepared
me
in burnt offerings and sacrifices for Sin thou hast had no
pleasure.
then said I lo I come in the volume of the book it is
written of me to do thy will O God.
above when he said sacrifice and offering and burnt offerings
and offering for Sin thou wouldest not Neither hadst pleasure
therein which are offered by the law
then said he lo I come to do thy will O God. he taketh away
the first that he may establish the second.
by the which will we are sanctified through the offering of
the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
and every priest standeth daily ministering and offering
oftentimes the same sacrifices which can never take away
sins
but this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for
ever sat down on the right hand of God
from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his
footstool.
for by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are
sanctified.
whereof the holy ghost also is a witness to us for after that
he had said before
this is the covenant that I will make with them after those
days saith the lord I will put my laws into their hearts
and in their minds will I write them
and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.
now where remission of these is there is no more offering for
Sin.
having therefore brethren boldness to enter into the holiest
by the blood of Jesus
by a new and living way which he hath consecrated for us
through the veil that is to say his flesh
and having an high priest over the house of God
let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and our
bodies washed with pure water.
let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering
 for he is faithful that promised
and let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to
good works
not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together as the
manner of some is but exhorting one another and so Much the
more as ye see the day approaching.
for if we Sin wilfully after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth there remaineth no more sacrifice for
sins
but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery
indignation which shall devour the adversaries.
he that despised Moses law died without mercy under two or
three witnesses
of how Much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought
worthy who hath trodden under foot the son of God and hath
counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he was
sanctified an unholy thing and hath done despite unto the
spirit of grace?
for we know him that hath said vengeance belongeth unto me I
will recompense saith the lord. and again the lord shall
judge his people.
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God.
but call to remembrance the former days in which after ye
were illuminated ye endured a great fight of afflictions
partly whilst ye were made a gazingstock both by reproaches
and afflictions and partly whilst ye became companions of
them that were so used.
for ye had compassion of me in my bonds and took joyfully the
spoiling of your goods knowing in yourselves that ye have in
heaven a better and an enduring substance.
cast not away therefore your confidence which hath great
recompence of reward.
for ye have need of patience that after ye have done the
will of God ye might receive the promise.
for yet a little while and he that shall come will come and
will not tarry.
now the just shall live by faith but if any man draw back my
soul shall have no pleasure in him.
but we are not of them who draw back unto perdition but of
them that believe to the saving of the soul.
now faith is the substance of things hoped for the evidence
of things not seen.
for by it the elders obtained a good report.
through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the
word of God so that things which are seen were not made of
things which do appear.
by faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than
Cain by which he obtained witness that he was righteous God
testifying of his gifts and by it he being dead yet speaketh.
by faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death
and was not found because God had translated him for before
his translation he had this testimony that he pleased God.
but without faith it is impossible to please him for he that
cometh to God must believe that he is and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
by faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet
moved with fear prepared an ark to the saving of his house
by the which he condemned the world and became heir of the
righteousness which is by faith.
by faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place
which he should after receive for an inheritance obeyed and
he went out not knowing whither he went.
by faith he sojourned in the land of promise as in a strange
country dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob the
heirs with him of the same promise
for he looked for a city which hath foundations whose builder
and maker is God.
through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive
seed and was delivered of a child when she was past age
because she judged him faithful who had promised.
therefore sprang there even of one and him as good as dead
so many as the stars of the sky in multitude and as the sand
which is by the sea shore innumerable.
these all died in faith not having received the promises but
having seen them afar off and were persuaded of them and
embraced them and confessed that they were strangers and
pilgrims on the earth.
for they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a
country.
and truly if they had been mindful of that country from
whence they came out they might have had opportunity to have
returned.
but now they desire a better country that is an heavenly
wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God for he
hath prepared for them a city.
by faith Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac and he
that had received the promises offered up his only begotten
son
of whom it was said that in Isaac shall thy seed be called
accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the
dead from whence also he received him in a figure.
by faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to
come.
by faith Jacob when he was a dying blessed both the sons of
Joseph and worshipped leaning upon the top of his staff.
by faith Joseph when he died made mention of the departing
of the children of Israel and gave commandment concerning his
bones.
by faith Moses when he was born was hid three months of his
parents because they saw he was a proper child and they were
not afraid of the king s commandment.
by faith Moses when he was come to years refused to be
called the son of Pharaoh s daughter
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God
than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater Riches than the
treasures in Egypt for he had respect unto the recompence of
the reward.
by faith he forsook Egypt not fearing the wrath of the king
for he endured as seeing him who is invisible.
through faith he kept the passover and the sprinkling of
blood lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them.
by faith they passed through the red sea as by dry land which
the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned.
by faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they were
compassed about seven days.
by faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed
not when she had received the spies with peace.
and what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell
of Gedeon and of Barak and of Samson and of Jephthae of
David also and Samuel and of the prophets
who through faith subdued kingdoms wrought righteousness
obtained promises stopped the mouths of lions.
quenched the violence of fire escaped the edge of the sword
out of weakness were made strong waxed valiant in fight
turned to flight the armies of the aliens.
women received their dead raised to life again and others
were tortured not accepting deliverance that they might
obtain a better resurrection
and others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings yea
moreover of bonds and imprisonment
they were stoned they were sawn asunder were tempted were
slain with the sword they wandered about in sheepskins and
goatskins being destitute afflicted tormented
 of whom the world was not worthy they wandered in deserts
and in mountains and in dens and caves of the earth.
and these all having obtained a good report through faith
received not the promise
God having provided some better thing for us that they
without us should not be made perfect.
wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses let us lay aside every weight and the Sin
which doth so easily beset us and let us run with patience
the race that is set before us
looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith who
for the joy that was set before him endured the cross
despising the shame and is set down at the right hand of the
throne of God.
for consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds.
ye have not yet resisted unto blood striving against Sin.
and ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you
as unto children my son despise not thou the chastening of
the lord nor faint when thou art rebuked of him
for whom the lord loveth he chasteneth and scourgeth every
son whom he receiveth.
if ye endure chastening God dealeth with you as with sons
for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not?
but if ye be without chastisement whereof all are partakers
then are ye bastards and not sons.
furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected
us and we gave them reverence shall we not Much rather be in
subjection unto the father of spirits and live?
for they verily for a few days chastened us after their own
pleasure but he for our profit that we might be partakers of
his holiness.
now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous but
grievous nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable
fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby.
wherefore lift up the hands which hang down and the feeble
knees
and make straight paths for your feet lest that which is lame
be turned out of the way but let it rather be healed.
follow peace with all men and holiness without which no man
shall see the lord
looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God lest
any root of bitterness springing up trouble you and thereby
many be defiled
lest there be any fornicator or profane person as Esau who
for one morsel of meat sold his birthright.
for ye know how that afterward when he would have inherited
the blessing he was rejected for he found no place of
repentance though he sought it carefully with tears.
for ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched and
that burned with fire nor unto blackness and darkness and
tempest
and the sound of a trumpet and the voice of words which
voice they that heard intreated that the word should not be
spoken to them any more
 for they could not endure that which was commanded and if so
Much as a beast touch the mountain it shall be stoned or
thrust through with a dart
and so terrible was the sight that Moses said I exceedingly
fear and quake
but ye are come unto mount Sion and unto the city of the
living God the heavenly Jerusalem and to an innumerable
company of angels
to the general assembly and church of the firstborn which are
written in heaven and to God the judge of all and to the
spirits of just men made perfect
and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant and to the
blood of sprinkling that speaketh better things than that of
Abel.
see that ye refuse not him that speaketh. for if they escaped
not who refused him that spake on earth Much more shall not
we escape if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven
whose voice then shook the earth but now he hath promised
saying yet once more I shake not the earth only but also
heaven.
and this word yet once more signifieth the removing of those
things that are shaken as of things that are made that those
things which cannot be shaken may remain.
wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved let us
have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence
and godly fear
for our God is a consuming fire.
let brotherly love continue.
be not forgetful to entertain strangers for thereby some have
entertained angels unawares.
remember them that are in bonds as bound with them and them
which suffer adversity as being yourselves also in the body.
marriage is honourable in all and the bed undefiled but
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.
let your conversation be without covetousness and be content
with such things as ye have for he hath said I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee.
so that we may boldly say the lord is my helper and I will
not fear what man shall do unto me.
remember them which have the rule over you who have spoken
unto you the word of God whose faith follow considering the
end of their conversation.
Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to day and for ever.
be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines. for it
is a good thing that the heart be established with grace not
with meats which have not profited them that have been
occupied therein.
we have an altar whereof they have no right to eat which
serve the tabernacle.
for the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into
the sanctuary by the high priest for Sin are burned without
the camp.
wherefore Jesus also that he might sanctify the people with
his own blood suffered without the gate.
let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp bearing
his reproach.
for here have we no continuing city but we seek one to come.
by him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually that is the fruit of our lips giving thanks to
his name.
but to do good and to communicate forget not for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.
obey them that have the rule over you and submit yourselves
for they watch for your souls as they that must give account
that they may do it with joy and not with grief for that is
unprofitable for you.
pray for us for we trust we have a good conscience in all
things willing to live honestly.
but I beseech you the rather to do this that I may be
restored to you the sooner.
now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our
lord Jesus that great Shepherd of the sheep through the
blood of the everlasting covenant
make you perfect in every good work to do his will working in
you that which is wellpleasing in his sight through Jesus
Christ to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
and I beseech you brethren suffer the word of exhortation
for I have written a letter unto you in few words.
know ye that our brother Timothy is set at liberty with whom
if he come shortly I will see you.
salute all them that have the rule over you and all the
saints. they of Italy salute you.
grace be with you all. Amen.
James a servant of God and of the lord Jesus Christ to the
twelve tribes which are scattered abroad greeting.
my brethren count it all joy when ye fall into divers
temptations
knowing this that the trying of your faith worketh patience.
but let patience have her perfect work that ye may be perfect
and entire wanting nothing.
if any of you lack wisdom let him ask of God that giveth to
all men liberally and upbraideth not and it shall be given
him.
but let him ask in faith nothing wavering. for he that
wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and
tossed.
for let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of
the lord.
a double minded man is unstable in all his ways.
let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted
but the rich in that he is made low because as the flower of
the grass he shall pass away.
for the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat but it
withereth the grass and the flower thereof falleth and the
grace of the fashion of it perisheth so also shall the rich
man fade away in his ways.
blessed is the man that endureth temptation for when he is
tried he shall receive the crown of life which the lord hath
promised to them that love him.
let no man say when he is tempted I Am tempted of God for
God cannot be tempted with evil Neither tempteth he any man
but every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own
lust and enticed.
then when lust hath conceived it bringeth forth Sin and Sin
when it is finished bringeth forth death.
do not err my beloved brethren.
every good gift and every perfect gift is from above and
cometh down from the father of lights with whom is no
variableness Neither shadow of turning.
of his own will begat he us with the word of truth that we
should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.
wherefore my beloved brethren let every man be swift to
hear slow to speak slow to wrath
for the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God.
wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness and receive with meekness the engrafted word
which is able to save your souls.
but be ye doers of the word and not hearers only deceiving
your own selves.
for if any be a hearer of the word and not a doer he is like
unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass
for he beholdeth himself and goeth his way and straightway
forgetteth what manner of man he was.
but whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty and
continueth therein he being not a forgetful hearer but a
doer of the work this man shall be blessed in his deed.
if any man among you seem to be religious and bridleth not
his tongue but deceiveth his own heart this man s religion
is vain.
pure religion and undefiled before God and the father is this
to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction and to
keep himself unspotted from the world.
my brethren have not the faith of our lord Jesus Christ the
lord of glory with respect of persons.
for if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring
in goodly apparel and there come in also a poor man in vile
raiment
and ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing and
say unto him sit thou here in a good place and say to the
poor stand thou there or sit here under my footstool
are ye not then partial in yourselves and are become judges
of evil thoughts?
hearken my beloved brethren hath not God chosen the poor of
this world rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which he
hath promised to them that love him?
but ye have despised the poor. do not rich men oppress you
and draw you before the judgment seats?
do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are
called?
if ye fulfil the royal law according to the scripture thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself ye do well
but if ye have respect to persons ye commit Sin and are
convinced of the law as transgressors.
for whosoever shall keep the whole law and yet offend in one
point he is guilty of all.
for he that said do not commit adultery said also do not
kill. now if thou commit no adultery yet if thou kill thou
art become a transgressor of the law.
so speak ye and so do as they that shall be judged by the
law of liberty.
for he shall have judgment without mercy that hath shewed no
mercy and mercy rejoiceth against judgment.
what doth it profit my brethren though a man say he hath
faith and have not works? can faith save him?
if a brother or sister be naked and destitute of daily food
and one of you say unto them depart in peace be ye warmed
and filled notwithstanding ye give them not those things
which are needful to the body what doth it profit?
even so faith if it hath not works is dead being alone.
yea a man may say thou hast faith and I have works shew me
thy faith without thy works and I will shew thee my faith by
my works.
thou believest that there is one God thou doest well the
devils also believe and tremble.
but wilt thou know O vain man that faith without works is
dead?
was not Abraham our father justified by works when he had
offered Isaac his son upon the altar?
seest thou how faith wrought with his works and by works was
faith made perfect?
and the scripture was fulfilled which saith Abraham believed
God and it was imputed unto him for righteousness and he was
called the friend of God.
ye see then how that by works a man is justified and not by
faith only.
likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works
when she had received the messengers and had sent them out
another way?
for as the body without the spirit is dead so faith without
works is dead also.
my brethren be not many masters knowing that we shall
receive the greater condemnation.
for in many things we offend all. if any man offend not in
word the same is a perfect man and able also to bridle the
whole body.
behold we put bits in the horses mouths that they may obey
us and we turn about their whole body.
behold also the ships which though they be so great and are
driven of fierce winds yet are they turned about with a very
small helm whithersoever the Governor listeth.
even so the tongue is a little member and boasteth great
things. behold how great a matter a little fire kindleth
and the tongue is a fire a world of iniquity so is the
tongue among our members that it defileth the whole body and
setteth on fire the course of nature and it is set on fire of
hell.
for every kind of beasts and of birds and of serpents and
of things in the sea is tamed and hath been tamed of
mankind
but the tongue can no man tame it is an unruly evil full of
deadly poison.
therewith bless we God even the father and therewith curse
we men which are made after the similitude of God.
out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. my
brethren these things ought not so to be.
doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and
bitter?
can the fig tree my brethren bear olive berries? either a
vine figs? so can no fountain both yield salt water and
fresh.
who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you? let him
shew out of a good conversation his works with meekness of
wisdom.
but if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts glory
not and lie not against the truth.
this wisdom descendeth not from above but is earthly
sensual devilish.
for where envying and strife is there is confusion and every
evil work.
but the wisdom that is from above is first pure then
peaceable gentle and easy to be intreated full of mercy and
good fruits without partiality and without hypocrisy.
and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that
make peace.
from whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not
hence even of your lusts that war in your members?
ye lust and have not ye kill and desire to have and cannot
obtain ye fight and war yet ye have not because ye ask not.
ye ask and receive not because ye ask amiss that ye may
consume it upon your lusts.
ye adulterers and adulteresses know ye not that the
friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever
therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.
do ye think that the scripture saith in vain the spirit that
dwelleth in us lusteth to envy?
but he giveth more grace. wherefore he saith God resisteth
the proud but giveth grace unto the humble.
submit yourselves therefore to God. resist the devil and he
will flee from you.
draw nigh to God and he will draw nigh to you. cleanse your
hands ye sinners and purify your hearts ye double minded.
be afflicted and mourn and weep let your laughter be turned
to mourning and your joy to heaviness.
humble yourselves in the sight of the lord and he shall lift
you up.
speak not evil one of another brethren. he that speaketh evil
of his brother and judgeth his brother speaketh evil of the
law and judgeth the law but if thou judge the law thou art
not a doer of the law but a judge.
there is one lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy who
art thou that judgest another?
go to now ye that say to day or to morrow we will go into
such a city and continue there a year and buy and sell and
get gain
whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow. for what is
your life? it is even a vapour that appeareth for a little
time and then vanisheth away.
for that ye ought to say if the lord will we shall live and
do this or that.
but now ye rejoice in your boastings all such rejoicing is
evil.
therefore to him that knoweth to do good and doeth it not to
him it is Sin.
go to now ye rich men weep and howl for your miseries that
shall come upon you.
your Riches are corrupted and your garments are motheaten.
your gold and Silver is cankered and the rust of them shall
be a witness against you and shall eat your flesh as it were
fire. ye have heaped treasure together for the last days.
behold the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your
fields which is of you kept back by fraud crieth and the
cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of
the lord of Sabaoth.
ye have lived in pleasure on the earth and been wanton ye
have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.
ye have condemned and killed the just and he doth not resist
you.
be patient therefore brethren unto the coming of the lord.
behold the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the
earth and hath long patience for it until he receive the
early and latter rain.
be ye also patient stablish your hearts for the coming of
the lord draweth nigh.
grudge not one against another brethren lest ye be
condemned behold the judge standeth before the door.
take my brethren the prophets who have spoken in the name
of the lord for an example of suffering affliction and of
patience.
behold we count them happy which endure. ye have heard of the
patience of Job and have seen the end of the lord that the
lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy.
but above all things my brethren swear not Neither by
heaven Neither by the earth Neither by any other oath but
let your yea be yea and your nay nay lest ye fall into
condemnation.
is any among you afflicted? let him pray. is any merry? let
him sing psalms.
is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the
church and let them pray over him anointing him with oil in
the name of the lord
and the prayer of faith shall save the sick and the lord
shall raise him up and if he have committed sins they shall
be forgiven him.
confess your faults one to another and pray one for another
that ye may be healed. the effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man availeth Much.
Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are and he
prayed earnestly that it might not rain and it rained not on
the earth by the space of three years and six months.
and he prayed again and the heaven gave rain and the earth
brought forth her fruit.
brethren if any of you do err from the truth and one convert
him
let him know that he which converteth the sinner from the
error of his way shall save a soul from death and shall hide
a multitude of sins.
Peter an apostle of Jesus Christ to the strangers scattered
throughout Pontus Galatia Cappadocia Asia and Bithynia
elect according to the foreknowledge of God the father
through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ grace unto you and
peace be multiplied.
blessed be the God and father of our lord Jesus Christ which
according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead
to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled and that
fadeth not away reserved in heaven for you
who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation
ready to be revealed in the last time.
wherein ye greatly rejoice though now for a season if need
be ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations
that the trial of your faith being Much more precious than of
gold that perisheth though it be tried with fire might be
found unto praise and honour and glory at the appearing of
Jesus Christ
whom having not seen ye love in whom though now ye see him
not yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full
of glory
receiving the end of your faith even the salvation of your
souls.
of which salvation the prophets have enquired and searched
diligently who prophesied of the grace that should come unto
you
searching what or what manner of time the spirit of Christ
which was in them did signify when it testified beforehand
the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow.
unto whom it was revealed that not unto themselves but unto
us they did minister the things which are now reported unto
you by them that have preached the gospel unto you with the
holy ghost sent down from heaven which things the angels
desire to look into.
wherefore gird up the loins of your mind be sober and hope
to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ
as obedient children not fashioning yourselves according to
the former lusts in your ignorance
but as he which hath called you is holy so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation
because it is written be ye holy for I Am holy.
and if ye call on the father who without respect of persons
judgeth according to every man s work pass the time of your
sojourning here in fear
forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things as Silver and gold from your vain
conversation received by tradition from your fathers
but with the precious blood of Christ as of a lamb without
blemish and without spot
who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the
world but was manifest in these last times for you
who by him do believe in God that raised him up from the
dead and gave him glory that your faith and hope might be in
God.
seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth
through the spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren see
that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently
being born again not of corruptible seed but of
incorruptible by the word of God which liveth and abideth
for ever.
for all flesh is as grass and all the glory of man as the
flower of grass. the grass withereth and the flower thereof
falleth away
but the word of the lord endureth for ever. and this is the
word which by the gospel is preached unto you.
wherefore laying aside all malice and all guile and
hypocrisies and envies all evil speakings
as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word that ye
may grow thereby
if so be ye have tasted that the lord is gracious.
to whom coming as unto a living stone disallowed indeed of
men but chosen of God and precious
ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house an
holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable
to God by Jesus Christ.
wherefore also it is contained in the scripture behold I lay
in Sion a chief corner stone elect precious and he that
believeth on him shall not be confounded.
unto you therefore which believe he is precious but unto them
which be disobedient the stone which the builders disallowed
the same is made the head of the corner
and a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence even to them
which stumble at the word being disobedient whereunto also
they were appointed.
but ye are a chosen generation a royal priesthood an holy
nation a peculiar people that ye should shew forth the
praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his
marvellous light
which in time past were not a people but are now the people
of God which had not obtained mercy but now have obtained
mercy.
dearly beloved I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims
abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul
having your conversation honest among the Gentiles that
whereas they speak against you as evildoers they may by your
good works which they shall behold glorify God in the day of
visitation.
submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the lord s
sake whether it be to the king as supreme
or unto governors as unto them that are sent by him for the
punishment of evildoers and for the praise of them that do
well.
for so is the will of God that with well doing ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men
as free and not using your liberty for a cloke of
maliciousness but as the servants of God.
honour all men. love the brotherhood. fear God. honour the
king.
servants be subject to your masters with all fear not only
to the good and gentle but also to the froward.
for this is thankworthy if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief suffering wrongfully.
for what glory is it if when ye be buffeted for your faults
ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well and
suffer for it ye take it patiently this is acceptable with
God.
for even hereunto were ye called because Christ also suffered
for us leaving us an example that ye should follow his
steps
who did no Sin Neither was guile found in his mouth
who when he was reviled reviled not again when he suffered
he threatened not but committed himself to him that judgeth
righteously
who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree
that we being dead to sins should live unto righteousness
by whose stripes ye were healed.
for ye were as sheep going astray but are now returned unto
the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.
likewise ye wives be in subjection to your own husbands
that if any obey not the word they also may without the word
be won by the conversation of the wives
while they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear.
whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting
the hair and of wearing of gold or of putting on of apparel
but let it be the hidden man of the heart in that which is
not corruptible even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit
which is in the sight of God of great price.
for after this manner in the old time the holy women also who
trusted in God adorned themselves being in subjection unto
their own husbands
even as Sara obeyed Abraham calling him lord whose daughters
ye are as long as ye do well and are not afraid with any
amazement.
likewise ye husbands dwell with them according to knowledge
giving honour unto the wife as unto the weaker vessel and as
being heirs together of the grace of life that your prayers
be not hindered.
finally be ye all of one mind having compassion one of
another love as brethren be pitiful be courteous
not rendering evil for evil or railing for railing but
contrariwise blessing knowing that ye are thereunto called
that ye should inherit a blessing.
for he that will love life and see good days let him refrain
his tongue from evil and his lips that they speak no guile
let him eschew evil and do good let him seek peace and
ensue it.
for the eyes of the lord are over the righteous and his ears
are open unto their prayers but the face of the lord is
against them that do evil.
and who is he that will harm you if ye be followers of that
which is good?
but and if ye suffer for righteousness sake happy are ye
and be not afraid of their terror Neither be troubled
but sanctify the lord God in your hearts and be ready always
to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the
hope that is in you with meekness and fear
having a good conscience that whereas they speak evil of
you as of evildoers they may be ashamed that falsely accuse
your good conversation in Christ.
for it is better if the will of God be so that ye suffer for
well doing than for evil doing.
for Christ also hath once suffered for sins the just for the
unjust that he might bring us to God being put to death in
the flesh but quickened by the spirit
by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison
which sometime were disobedient when once the longsuffering
of God waited in the days of Noah while the ark was a
preparing wherein few that is eight souls were saved by
water.
the like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us
 not the putting away of the filth of the flesh but the
answer of a good conscience toward God by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ
who is gone into heaven and is on the right hand of God
angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him.
forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh
arm yourselves likewise with the same mind for he that hath
suffered in the flesh hath ceased from Sin
that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the
flesh to the lusts of men but to the will of God.
for the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought
the will of the Gentiles when we walked in lasciviousness
lusts excess of wine revellings banquetings and abominable
idolatries
wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them to the
same excess of riot speaking evil of you
who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick
and the dead.
for for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that
are dead that they might be judged according to men in the
flesh but live according to God in the spirit.
but the end of all things is at hand be ye therefore sober
and watch unto prayer.
and above all things have fervent charity among yourselves
for charity shall cover the multitude of sins.
use hospitality one to another without grudging.
as every man hath received the gift even so minister the same
one to another as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
if any man speak let him speak as the oracles of God if any
man minister let him do it as of the ability which God
giveth that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus
Christ to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever.
Amen.
beloved think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which
is to try you as though some strange thing happened unto you
but rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ s
sufferings that when his glory shall be revealed ye may be
glad also with exceeding joy.
if ye be reproached for the name of Christ happy are ye for
the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you on their part
he is evil spoken of but on your part he is glorified.
but let none of you suffer as a murderer or as a thief or as
an evildoer or as a busybody in other men s matters.
yet if any man suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed
but let him glorify God on this behalf.
for the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of
God and if it first begin at us what shall the end be of
them that obey not the gospel of God?
and if the righteous scarcely be saved where shall the
ungodly and the sinner appear?
wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God
commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing as
unto a faithful creator.
the elders which are among you I exhort who Am also an elder
and a witness of the sufferings of Christ and also a partaker
of the glory that shall be revealed
feed the flock of God which is among you taking the oversight
thereof not by constraint but willingly not for filthy
lucre but of a ready mind
Neither as being lords over God s heritage but being
ensamples to the flock.
and when the chief Shepherd shall appear ye shall receive a
crown of glory that fadeth not away.
likewise ye younger submit yourselves unto the elder. yea
all of you be subject one to another and be clothed with
humility for God resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the
humble.
humble yourselves therefore under the Mighty hand of God that
he may exalt you in due time
casting all your care upon him for he careth for you.
be sober be vigilant because your adversary the devil as a
roaring lion walketh about seeking whom he may devour
whom resist stedfast in the faith knowing that the same
afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the
world.
but the God of all grace who hath called us unto his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus after that ye have suffered a while
make you perfect stablish strengthen settle you.
to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
by Silvanus a faithful brother unto you as I suppose I have
written briefly exhorting and testifying that this is the
true grace of God wherein ye stand.
the church that is at Babylon elected together with you
saluteth you and so doth Marcus my son.
greet ye one another with a Kiss of charity. peace be with you
all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen.
Simon Peter a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ to them
that have obtained like precious faith with us through the
righteousness of God and our saviour Jesus Christ
grace and peace be multiplied unto you through the knowledge
of God and of Jesus our lord
according as his divine power hath given unto us all things
that pertain unto life and godliness through the knowledge of
him that hath called us to glory and virtue
whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
promises that by these ye might be partakers of the divine
nature having escaped the corruption that is in the world
through lust.
and beside this giving all diligence add to your faith
virtue and to virtue knowledge
and to knowledge temperance and to temperance patience and
to patience godliness
and to godliness brotherly kindness and to brotherly kindness
charity.
for if these things be in you and abound they make you that
ye shall Neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of
our lord Jesus Christ.
but he that lacketh these things is blind and cannot see afar
off and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.
wherefore the rather brethren give diligence to make your
calling and election sure for if ye do these things ye shall
never fall
for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly
into the everlasting kingdom of our lord and saviour Jesus
Christ.
wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things though ye know them and be
established in the present truth.
yea I think it meet as long as I Am in this tabernacle to
stir you up by putting you in remembrance
knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle even
as our lord Jesus Christ hath shewed me.
moreover I will endeavour that ye may be able after my decease
to have these things always in remembrance.
for we have not followed cunningly devised fables when we
made known unto you the power and coming of our lord Jesus
Christ but were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
for he received from God the father honour and glory when
there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory this
is my beloved son in whom I Am well pleased.
and this voice which came from heaven we heard when we were
with him in the holy mount.
we have also a more sure word of prophecy whereunto ye do
well that ye take heed as unto a light that shineth in a dark
place until the day dawn and the day star Arise in your
hearts
knowing this first that no prophecy of the scripture is of
any private interpretation.
for the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man but
holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy ghost.
but there were false prophets also among the people even as
there shall be false teachers among you who privily shall
bring in damnable heresies even denying the lord that bought
them and bring upon themselves swift destruction.
and many shall follow their pernicious ways by reason of whom
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.
and through covetousness shall they with feigned words make
merchandise of you whose judgment now of a long time
lingereth not and their damnation slumbereth not.
for if God spared not the angels that sinned but cast them
down to hell and delivered them into chains of darkness to
be reserved unto judgment
and spared not the old world but saved Noah the eighth
person a preacher of righteousness bringing in the flood
upon the world of the ungodly
and turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes
condemned them with an overthrow making them an ensample unto
those that after should live ungodly
and delivered just Lot vexed with the filthy conversation of
the wicked
 for that righteous man dwelling among them in seeing and
hearing vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their
unlawful deeds
the lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations
and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished
but chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of
uncleanness and despise government. presumptuous are they
selfwilled they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities.
whereas angels which are greater in power and might bring
not railing accusation against them before the lord.
but these as natural brute beasts made to be taken and
destroyed speak evil of the things that they understand not
and shall utterly perish in their own corruption
and shall receive the reward of unrighteousness as they that
count it pleasure to riot in the day time. spots they are and
blemishes sporting themselves with their own deceivings while
they feast with you
having eyes full of adultery and that cannot cease from Sin
beguiling unstable souls an heart they have exercised with
covetous practices cursed children
which have forsaken the right way and are gone astray
following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor who loved the
wages of unrighteousness
but was rebuked for his iniquity the dumb ass speaking with
man s voice forbad the madness of the prophet.
these are wells without water clouds that are carried with a
tempest to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.
for when they speak great swelling words of vanity they
allure through the lusts of the flesh through Much
wantonness those that were clean escaped from them who live
in error.
while they promise them liberty they themselves are the
servants of corruption for of whom a man is overcome of the
same is he brought in bondage.
for if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world
through the knowledge of the lord and saviour Jesus Christ
they are again entangled therein and overcome the latter end
is worse with them than the beginning.
for it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness than after they have known it to turn from
the holy commandment delivered unto them.
but it is happened unto them according to the true proverb
the dog is turned to his own vomit again and the sow that was
washed to her wallowing in the mire.
this second epistle beloved I now write unto you in both
which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance
that ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before
by the holy prophets and of the commandment of us the
apostles of the lord and saviour
knowing this first that there shall come in the last days
scoffers walking after their own lusts
and saying where is the promise of his coming? for since the
fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the creation.
for this they willingly are ignorant of that by the word of
God the heavens were of old and the earth standing out of the
water and in the water
whereby the world that then was being overflowed with water
perished
but the heavens and the earth which are now by the same word
are kept in store reserved unto fire against the day of
judgment and perdition of ungodly men.
but beloved be not ignorant of this one thing that one day
is with the lord as a thousand years and a thousand years as
one day.
the lord is not slack concerning his promise as some men
count slackness but is longsuffering to us-ward not willing
that any should perish but that all should come to
repentance.
but the day of the lord will come as a thief in the night in
the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise and
the elements shall melt with fervent heat the earth also and
the works that are therein shall be burned up.
seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved what
manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and
godliness
looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God
wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved and the
elements shall melt with fervent heat?
nevertheless we according to his promise look for new
heavens and a new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness.
wherefore beloved seeing that ye look for such things be
diligent that ye may be found of him in peace without spot
and blameless.
and account that the longsuffering of our lord is salvation
even as our beloved brother Paul also according to the wisdom
given unto him hath written unto you
as also in all his epistles speaking in them of these things
in which are some things hard to be understood which they
that are unlearned and unstable wrest as they do also the
other scriptures unto their own destruction.
ye therefore beloved seeing ye know these things before
beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the
wicked fall from your own stedfastness.
but grow in grace and in the knowledge of our lord and
saviour Jesus Christ. to him be glory both now and for ever.
Amen.
that which was from the beginning which we have heard which
we have seen with our eyes which we have looked upon and our
hands have handled of the word of life
 for the life was manifested and we have seen it and bear
witness and shew unto you that eternal life which was with
the father and was manifested unto us
that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you that ye
also may have fellowship with us and truly our fellowship is
with the father and with his son Jesus Christ.
and these things write we unto you that your joy may be full.
this then is the message which we have heard of him and
declare unto you that God is light and in him is no darkness
at all.
if we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in
darkness we lie and do not the truth
but if we walk in the light as he is in the light we have
fellowship one with another and the blood of Jesus Christ his
son cleanseth us from all Sin.
if we say that we have no Sin we deceive ourselves and the
truth is not in us.
if we confess our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
if we say that we have not sinned we make him a liar and his
word is not in us.
my little children these things write I unto you that ye Sin
not. and if any man Sin we have an advocate with the father
Jesus Christ the righteous
and he is the propitiation for our sins and not for our s
only but also for the sins of the whole world.
and hereby we do know that we know him if we keep his
commandments.
he that saith I know him and keepeth not his commandments
is a liar and the truth is not in him.
but whoso keepeth his word in him verily is the love of God
perfected hereby know we that we are in him.
he that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk
even as he walked.
brethren I write no new commandment unto you but an old
commandment which ye had from the beginning. the old
commandment is the word which ye have heard from the
beginning.
again a new commandment I write unto you which thing is true
in him and in you because the darkness is past and the true
light now shineth.
he that saith he is in the light and hateth his brother is
in darkness even until now.
he that loveth his brother abideth in the light and there is
none occasion of stumbling in him.
but he that hateth his brother is in darkness and walketh in
darkness and knoweth not whither he goeth because that
darkness hath blinded his eyes.
I write unto you little children because your sins are
forgiven you for his name s sake.
I write unto you fathers because ye have known him that is
from the beginning. I write unto you young men because ye
have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you little
children because ye have known the father.
I have written unto you fathers because ye have known him
that is from the beginning. I have written unto you young
men because ye are strong and the word of God abideth in
you and ye have overcome the wicked one.
love not the world Neither the things that are in the world.
if any man love the world the love of the father is not in
him.
for all that is in the world the lust of the flesh and the
lust of the eyes and the pride of life is not of the father
but is of the world.
and the world passeth away and the lust thereof but he that
doeth the will of God abideth for ever.
little children it is the last time and as ye have heard
that antichrist shall come even now are there many
antichrists whereby we know that it is the last time.
they went out from us but they were not of us for if they
had been of us they would no doubt have continued with us
but they went out that they might be made manifest that they
were not all of us.
but ye have an unction from the holy one and ye know all
things.
I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth but
because ye know it and that no lie is of the truth.
who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? he
is antichrist that denieth the father and the son.
whosoever denieth the son the same hath not the father he
that acknowledgeth the son hath the father also.
let that therefore abide in you which ye have heard from the
beginning. if that which ye have heard from the beginning
shall remain in you ye also shall continue in the son and in
the father.
and this is the promise that he hath promised us even eternal
life.
these things have I written unto you concerning them that
seduce you.
but the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in
you and ye need not that any man teach you but as the same
anointing teacheth you of all things and is truth and is no
lie and even as it hath taught you ye shall abide in him.
and now little children abide in him that when he shall
appear we may have confidence and not be ashamed before him
at his coming.
if ye know that he is righteous ye know that every one that
doeth righteousness is born of him.
behold what manner of love the father hath bestowed upon us
that we should be called the sons of God therefore the world
knoweth us not because it knew him not.
beloved now are we the sons of God and it doth not yet
appear what we shall be but we know that when he shall
appear we shall be like him for we shall see him as he is.
and every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself
even as he is pure.
whosoever committeth Sin transgresseth also the law for Sin
is the transgression of the law.
and ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins and
in him is no Sin.
whosoever abideth in him sinneth not whosoever sinneth hath
not seen him Neither known him.
little children let no man deceive you he that doeth
righteousness is righteous even as he is righteous.
he that committeth Sin is of the devil for the devil sinneth
from the beginning. for this purpose the son of God was
manifested that he might destroy the works of the devil.
whosoever is born of God doth not commit Sin for his seed
remaineth in him and he cannot Sin because he is born of
God.
in this the children of God are manifest and the children of
the devil whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God
Neither he that loveth not his brother.
for this is the message that ye heard from the beginning that
we should love one another.
not as Cain who was of that wicked one and slew his brother.
and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil
and his brother s righteous.
marvel not my brethren if the world hate you.
we know that we have passed from death unto life because we
love the brethren. he that loveth not his brother abideth in
death.
whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer and ye know that
no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.
hereby perceive we the love of God because he laid down his
life for us and we ought to lay down our lives for the
brethren.
but whoso hath this world s good and seeth his brother have
need and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him how
dwelleth the love of God in him?
my little children let us not love in word Neither in
tongue but in deed and in truth.
and hereby we know that we are of the truth and shall assure
our hearts before him.
for if our heart condemn us God is greater than our heart
and knoweth all things.
beloved if our heart condemn us not then have we confidence
toward God.
and whatsoever we ask we receive of him because we keep his
commandments and do those things that are pleasing in his
sight.
and this is his commandment that we should believe on the
name of his son Jesus Christ and love one another as he gave
us commandment.
and he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him and he
in him. and hereby we know that he abideth in us by the
spirit which he hath given us.
beloved believe not every spirit but try the spirits whether
they are of God because many false prophets are gone out into
the world.
hereby know ye the spirit of God every spirit that confesseth
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God
and every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh is not of God and this is that spirit of
antichrist whereof ye have heard that it should come and
even now already is it in the world.
ye are of God little children and have overcome them
because greater is he that is in you than he that is in the
world.
they are of the world therefore speak they of the world and
the world heareth them.
we are of God he that knoweth God heareth us he that is not
of God heareth not us. hereby know we the spirit of truth and
the spirit of error.
beloved let us love one another for love is of God and
every one that loveth is born of God and knoweth God.
he that loveth not knoweth not God for God is love.
in this was manifested the love of God toward us because that
God sent his only begotten son into the world that we might
live through him.
herein is love not that we loved God but that he loved us
and sent his son to be the propitiation for our sins.
beloved if God so loved us we ought also to love one
another.
no man hath seen God at any time. if we love one another God
dwelleth in us and his love is perfected in us.
hereby know we that we dwell in him and he in us because he
hath given us of his spirit.
and we have seen and do testify that the father sent the son
to be the saviour of the world.
whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the son of God God
dwelleth in him and he in God.
and we have known and believed the love that God hath to us.
God is love and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God and
God in him.
herein is our love made perfect that we may have boldness in
the day of judgment because as he is so are we in this
world.
there is no fear in love but perfect love casteth out fear
because fear hath torment. he that feareth is not made perfect
in love.
we love him because he first loved us.
if a man say I love God and hateth his brother he is a
liar for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen
how can he love God whom he hath not seen?
and this commandment have we from him that he who loveth God
love his brother also.
whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God
and every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that
is begotten of him.
by this we know that we love the children of God when we love
God and keep his commandments.
for this is the love of God that we keep his commandments
and his commandments are not grievous.
for whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world and this
is the victory that overcometh the world even our faith.
who is he that overcometh the world but he that believeth
that Jesus is the son of God?
this is he that came by water and blood even Jesus Christ
not by water only but by water and blood. and it is the
spirit that beareth witness because the spirit is truth.
for there are three that bear record in heaven the father
the word and the holy ghost and these three are one.
and there are three that bear witness in earth the spirit
and the water and the blood and these three agree in one.
if we receive the witness of men the witness of God is
greater for this is the witness of God which he hath
testified of his son.
he that believeth on the son of God hath the witness in
himself he that believeth not God hath made him a liar
because he believeth not the record that God gave of his son.
and this is the record that God hath given to us eternal
life and this life is in his son.
he that hath the son hath life and he that hath not the son
of God hath not life.
these things have I written unto you that believe on the name
of the son of God that ye may know that ye have eternal life
and that ye may believe on the name of the son of God.
and this is the confidence that we have in him that if we
ask any thing according to his will he heareth us
and if we know that he hear us whatsoever we ask we know
that we have the petitions that we desired of him.
if any man see his brother Sin a Sin which is not unto death
he shall ask and he shall give him life for them that Sin not
unto death. there is a Sin unto death I do not say that he
shall pray for it.
all unrighteousness is Sin and there is a Sin not unto death.
we know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not but he that
is begotten of God keepeth himself and that wicked one
toucheth him not.
and we know that we are of God and the whole world lieth in
wickedness.
and we know that the son of God is come and hath given us an
understanding that we may know him that is true and we are
in him that is true even in his son Jesus Christ. this is the
true God and eternal life.
little children keep yourselves from idols. Amen.
the elder unto the elect lady and her children whom I love in
the truth and not I only but also all they that have known
the truth
for the truth s sake which dwelleth in us and shall be with
us for ever.
grace be with you mercy and peace from God the father and
from the lord Jesus Christ the son of the father in truth
and love.
I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children walking in
truth as we have received a commandment from the father.
and now I beseech thee lady not as though I wrote a new
commandment unto thee but that which we had from the
beginning that we love one another.
and this is love that we walk after his commandments. this is
the commandment that as ye have heard from the beginning ye
should walk in it.
for many deceivers are entered into the world who confess not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. this is a deceiver and
an antichrist.
look to yourselves that we lose not those things which we
have wrought but that we receive a full reward.
whosoever transgresseth and abideth not in the doctrine of
Christ hath not God. he that abideth in the doctrine of
Christ he hath both the father and the son.
if there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine
receive him not into your house Neither bid him God speed
for he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil
deeds.
having many things to write unto you I would not write with
paper and ink but I trust to come unto you and speak face to
face that our joy may be full.
the children of thy elect sister greet thee. Amen.
the elder unto the wellbeloved Gaius whom I love in the
truth.
beloved I wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and
be in health even as thy soul prospereth.
for I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came and testified
of the truth that is in thee even as thou walkest in the
truth.
I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in
truth.
beloved thou doest faithfully whatsoever thou doest to the
brethren and to strangers
which have borne witness of thy charity before the church
whom if thou bring forward on their journey after a godly
sort thou shalt do well
because that for his name s sake they went forth taking
nothing of the Gentiles.
we therefore ought to receive such that we might be
fellowhelpers to the truth.
I wrote unto the church but Diotrephes who loveth to have
the preeminence among them receiveth us not.
wherefore if I come I will remember his deeds which he
doeth prating against us with malicious words and not
content therewith Neither doth he himself receive the
brethren and forbiddeth them that would and casteth them out
of the church.
beloved follow not that which is evil but that which is
good. he that doeth good is of God but he that doeth evil
hath not seen God.
Demetrius hath good report of all men and of the truth
itself yea and we also bear record and ye know that our
record is true.
I had many things to write but I will not with ink and pen
write unto thee
but I trust I shall shortly see thee and we shall speak face
to face. peace be to thee. our friends salute thee. greet the
friends by name.
Jude the servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James to
them that are sanctified by God the father and preserved in
Jesus Christ and called
mercy unto you and peace and love be multiplied.
beloved when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the
common salvation it was needful for me to write unto you and
exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the faith
which was once delivered unto the saints.
for there are certain men crept in unawares who were before
of old ordained to this condemnation ungodly men turning the
grace of our God into lasciviousness and denying the only
lord God and our lord Jesus Christ.
I will therefore put you in remembrance though ye once knew
this how that the lord having saved the people out of the
land of Egypt afterward destroyed them that believed not.
and the angels which kept not their first estate but left
their own habitation he hath reserved in everlasting chains
under darkness unto the judgment of the great day.
even as Sodom and Gomorrha and the cities about them in like
manner giving themselves over to fornication and going after
strange flesh are set forth for an example suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire.
likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh despise
dominion and speak evil of dignities.
yet Michael the archangel when contending with the devil he
disputed about the body of Moses durst not bring against him
a railing accusation but said the lord rebuke thee.
but these speak evil of those things which they know not but
what they know naturally as brute beasts in those things
they corrupt themselves.
woe unto them for they have gone in the way of Cain and ran
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward and perished in
the gainsaying of Core.
these are spots in your feasts of charity when they feast
with you feeding themselves without fear clouds they are
without water carried about of winds trees whose fruit
withereth without fruit twice dead plucked up by the roots
raging waves of the sea foaming out their own shame
wandering stars to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness
for ever.
and Enoch also the seventh from Adam prophesied of these
saying behold the lord cometh with Ten thousands of his
saints
to execute judgment upon all and to convince all that are
ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have
ungodly committed and of all their hard speeches which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him.
these are murmurers complainers walking after their own
lusts and their mouth speaketh great swelling words having
men s persons in admiration because of advantage.
but beloved remember ye the words which were spoken before
of the apostles of our lord Jesus Christ
how that they told you there should be mockers in the last
time who should walk after their own ungodly lusts.
these be they who separate themselves sensual having not the
spirit.
but ye beloved building up yourselves on your most holy
faith praying in the holy ghost
keep yourselves in the love of God looking for the mercy of
our lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
and of some have compassion making a difference
and others save with fear pulling them out of the fire
hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.
now unto him that is able to keep you from falling and to
present you faultless before the presence of his glory with
exceeding joy
to the only wise God our saviour be glory and majesty
dominion and power both now and ever. Amen.
the revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave unto him to
shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass
and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant
John
who bare record of the word of God and of the testimony of
Jesus Christ and of all things that he saw.
blessed is he that readeth and they that hear the words of
this prophecy and keep those things which are written
therein for the time is at hand.
John to the seven churches which are in Asia grace be unto
you and peace from him which is and which was and which is
to come and from the seven spirits which are before his
throne
and from Jesus Christ who is the faithful witness and the
first begotten of the dead and the prince of the kings of the
earth. unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in
his own blood
and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his father to
him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
behold he cometh with clouds and every eye shall see him
and they also which pierced him and all kindreds of the earth
shall wail because of him. even so Amen.
I Am Alpha and Omega the beginning and the ending saith the
lord which is and which was and which is to come the
almighty.
I John who also Am your brother and companion in
tribulation and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ
was in the isle that is called Patmos for the word of God
and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.
I was in the spirit on the lord s day and heard behind me a
great voice as of a trumpet
saying I Am Alpha and Omega the first and the last and
what thou seest write in a book and send it unto the seven
churches which are in Asia unto Ephesus and unto Smyrna and
unto Pergamos and unto Thyatira and unto Sardis and unto
Philadelphia and unto Laodicea.
and I turned to see the voice that spake with me. and being
turned I saw seven golden candlesticks
and in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto the
son of man clothed with a garment down to the foot and girt
about the paps with a golden girdle.
his head and his hairs were white like wool as white as snow
and his eyes were as a flame of fire
and his feet like unto fine brass as if they burned in a
furnace and his voice as the sound of many waters.
and he had in his right hand seven stars and out of his mouth
went a Sharp twoedged sword and his countenance was as the
sun shineth in his strength.
and when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead. and he laid
his right hand upon me saying unto me fear not I Am the
first and the last
I Am he that liveth and was dead and behold I Am alive for
evermore Amen and have the keys of hell and of death.
write the things which thou hast seen and the things which
are and the things which shall be hereafter
the mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right
hand and the seven golden candlesticks. the seven stars are
the angels of the seven churches and the seven candlesticks
which thou sawest are the seven churches.
unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write these things
saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand who
walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks
I know thy works and thy labour and thy patience and how
thou canst not bear them which are evil and thou hast tried
them which say they are apostles and are not and hast found
them liars
and hast borne and hast patience and for my name s sake hast
laboured and hast not fainted.
nevertheless I have somewhat against thee because thou hast
left thy first love.
remember therefore from whence thou art fallen and repent
and do the first works or else I will come unto thee quickly
and will remove thy candlestick out of his place except thou
repent.
but this thou hast that thou hatest the deeds of the
Nicolaitanes which I also hate.
he that hath an ear let him hear what the spirit saith unto
the churches to him that overcometh will I give to eat of the
tree of life which is in the midst of the paradise of God.
and unto the angel of the church in Smyrna write these things
saith the first and the last which was dead and is alive
I know thy works and tribulation and poverty but thou art
rich and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are
Jews and are not but are the synagogue of Satan.
fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer behold the
devil shall cast some of you into prison that ye may be
tried and ye shall have tribulation Ten days be thou
faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown of life.
he that hath an ear let him hear what the spirit saith unto
the churches he that overcometh shall not be hurt of the
second death.
and to the angel of the church in Pergamos write these things
saith he which hath the Sharp sword with two edges
I know thy works and where thou dwellest even where Satan s
seat is and thou holdest fast my name and hast not denied my
faith even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful
martyr who was slain among you where Satan dwelleth.
but I have a few things against thee because thou hast there
them that hold the doctrine of Balaam who taught Balac to
cast a stumblingblock before the children of Israel to eat
things sacrificed unto idols and to commit fornication.
so hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitanes which thing I hate.
repent or else I will come unto thee quickly and will fight
against them with the sword of my mouth.
he that hath an ear let him hear what the spirit saith unto
the churches to him that overcometh will I give to eat of the
hidden Manna and will give him a white stone and in the
stone a new name written which no man knoweth saving he that
receiveth it.
and unto the angel of the church in Thyatira write these
things saith the son of God who hath his eyes like unto a
flame of fire and his feet are like fine brass
I know thy works and charity and service and faith and thy
patience and thy works and the last to be more than the
first.
notwithstanding I have a few things against thee because thou
sufferest that woman Jezebel which calleth herself a
prophetess to teach and to seduce my servants to commit
fornication and to eat things sacrificed unto idols.
and I gave her space to repent of her fornication and she
repented not.
behold I will cast her into a bed and them that commit
adultery with her into great tribulation except they repent
of their deeds.
and I will kill her children with death and all the churches
shall know that I Am he which searcheth the reins and hearts
and I will give unto every one of you according to your works.
but unto you I say and unto the rest in Thyatira as many as
have not this doctrine and which have not known the depths of
Satan as they speak I will put upon you none other burden.
but that which ye have already hold fast till I come.
and he that overcometh and keepeth my works unto the end to
him will I give power over the nations
and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron as the vessels of a
potter shall they be broken to shivers even as I received of
my father.
and I will give him the morning star.
he that hath an ear let him hear what the spirit saith unto
the churches.
and unto the angel of the church in Sardis write these things
saith he that hath the seven spirits of God and the seven
stars I know thy works that thou hast a name that thou
livest and art dead.
be watchful and strengthen the things which remain that are
ready to die for I have not found thy works perfect before
God.
remember therefore how thou hast received and heard and hold
fast and repent. if therefore thou shalt not watch I will
come on thee as a thief and thou shalt not know what hour I
will come upon thee.
thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled
their garments and they shall walk with me in white for they
are worthy.
he that overcometh the same shall be clothed in white
raiment and I will not blot out his name out of the book of
life but I will confess his name before my father and before
his angels.
he that hath an ear let him hear what the spirit saith unto
the churches.
and to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write these
things saith he that is holy he that is true he that hath
the key of David he that openeth and no man shutteth and
shutteth and no man openeth
I know thy works behold I have set before thee an open door
and no man can shut it for thou hast a little strength and
hast kept my word and hast not denied my name.
behold I will make them of the synagogue of Satan which say
they are Jews and are not but do lie behold I will make
them to come and worship before thy feet and to know that I
have loved thee.
because thou hast kept the word of my patience I also will
keep thee from the hour of temptation which shall come upon
all the world to try them that dwell upon the earth.
behold I come quickly hold that fast which thou hast that
no man take thy crown.
him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my
God and he shall go no more out and I will write upon him
the name of my God and the name of the city of my God which
is new Jerusalem which cometh down out of heaven from my God
and I will write upon him my new name.
he that hath an ear let him hear what the spirit saith unto
the churches.
and unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write
these things saith the Amen the faithful and true witness
the beginning of the creation of God
I know thy works that thou art Neither cold nor hot I would
thou wert cold or hot.
so then because thou art lukewarm and Neither cold nor hot I
will spue thee out of my mouth.
because thou sayest I Am rich and increased with goods and
have need of nothing and knowest not that thou art wretched
and miserable and poor and blind and naked
I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire that thou
mayest be rich and white raiment that thou mayest be
clothed and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear
and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve that thou mayest see.
as many as I love I rebuke and chasten be zealous therefore
and repent.
behold I stand at the door and knock if any man hear my
voice and open the door I will come in to him and will sup
with him and he with me.
to him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my
throne even as I also overcame and Am set down with my
father in his throne.
he that hath an ear let him hear what the spirit saith unto
the churches.
after this I looked and behold a door was opened in heaven
and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet
talking with me which said come up hither and I will shew
thee things which must be hereafter.
and Immediately I was in the spirit and behold a throne was
set in heaven and one sat on the throne.
and he that sat was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine
stone and there was a rainbow round about the throne in
sight like unto an emerald.
and round about the throne were four and twenty seats and
upon the seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting clothed
in white raiment and they had on their heads crowns of gold.
and out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings and
voices and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the
throne which are the seven spirits of God.
and before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto
crystal and in the midst of the throne and round about the
throne were four beasts full of eyes before and behind.
and the first beast was like a lion and the second beast like
a calf and the third beast had a face as a man and the
fourth beast was like a flying eagle.
and the four beasts had each of them six wings about him and
they were full of eyes within and they rest not day and
night saying holy holy holy lord God almighty which was
and is and is to come.
and when those beasts give glory and honour and thanks to him
that sat on the throne who liveth for ever and ever
the four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat on
the throne and worship him that liveth for ever and ever and
cast their crowns before the throne saying
thou art worthy O lord to receive glory and honour and
power for thou hast created all things and for thy pleasure
they are and were created.
and I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a
book written within and on the backside sealed with seven
seals.
and I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice who is
worthy to open the book and to loose the seals thereof?
and no man in heaven nor in earth Neither under the earth
was able to open the book Neither to look thereon.
and I wept Much because no man was found worthy to open and
to read the book Neither to look thereon.
and one of the elders saith unto me weep not behold the
lion of the tribe of Juda the root of David hath prevailed
to open the book and to loose the seven seals thereof.
and I beheld and lo in the midst of the throne and of the
four beasts and in the midst of the elders stood a lamb as
it had been slain having seven horns and seven eyes which
are the seven spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.
and he came and took the book out of the right hand of him
that sat upon the throne.
and when he had taken the book the four beasts and four and
twenty elders fell down before the lamb having every one of
them harps and golden vials full of odours which are the
prayers of saints.
and they sung a new song saying thou art worthy to take the
book and to open the seals thereof for thou wast slain and
hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred and
tongue and people and nation
and hast made us unto our God kings and priests and we shall
reign on the earth.
and I beheld and I heard the voice of many angels round about
the throne and the beasts and the elders and the number of
them was Ten thousand times Ten thousand and thousands of
thousands
saying with a loud voice worthy is the lamb that was slain to
receive power and Riches and wisdom and strength and
honour and glory and blessing.
and every creature which is in heaven and on the earth and
under the earth and such as are in the sea and all that are
in them heard I saying blessing and honour and glory and
power be unto him that sitteth upon the throne and unto the
lamb for ever and ever.
and the four beasts said Amen. and the four and twenty elders
fell down and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever.
and I saw when the lamb opened one of the seals and I heard
as it were the noise of thunder one of the four beasts
saying come and see.
and I saw and behold a white horse and he that sat on him
had a bow and a crown was given unto him and he went forth
conquering and to conquer.
and when he had opened the second seal I heard the second
beast say come and see.
and there went out another horse that was red and power was
given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth
and that they should kill one another and there was given
unto him a great sword.
and when he had opened the third seal I heard the third beast
say come and see. and I beheld and lo a black horse and he
that sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand.
and I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say a
measure of wheat for a penny and three measures of barley for
a penny and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.
and when he had opened the fourth seal I heard the voice of
the fourth beast say come and see.
and I looked and behold a pale horse and his name that sat
on him was death and hell followed with him. and power was
given unto them over the fourth part of the earth to kill
with sword and with hunger and with death and with the
beasts of the earth.
and when he had opened the fifth seal I saw under the altar
the souls of them that were slain for the word of God and for
the testimony which they held
and they cried with a loud voice saying how long O lord
holy and true dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth?
and white robes were given unto every one of them and it was
said unto them that they should rest yet for a little season
until their fellowservants also and their brethren that
should be killed as they were should be fulfilled.
and I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal and lo there
was a great earthquake and the sun became black as sackcloth
of hair and the moon became as blood
and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth even as a fig
tree casteth her untimely figs when she is shaken of a Mighty
wind.
and the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled
together and every mountain and island were moved out of
their places.
and the kings of the earth and the great men and the rich
men and the chief captains and the Mighty men and every
bondman and every free man hid themselves in the dens and in
the rocks of the mountains
and said to the mountains and rocks fall on us and hide us
from the face of him that sitteth on the throne and from the
wrath of the lamb
for the great day of his wrath is come and who shall be able
to stand?
and after these things I saw four angels standing on the four
corners of the earth holding the four winds of the earth
that the wind should not blow on the earth nor on the sea
nor on any tree.
and I saw another angel ascending from the east having the
seal of the living God and he cried with a loud voice to the
four angels to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the
sea
saying hurt not the earth Neither the sea nor the trees
till we have sealed the servants of our God in their
foreheads.
and I heard the number of them which were sealed and there
were sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of all the
tribes of the children of Israel.
of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe
of Reuben were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of Gad
were sealed twelve thousand.
of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe
of Nephthalim were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of
Manasses were sealed twelve thousand.
of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. of the
tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of
Issachar were sealed twelve thousand.
of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. of the
tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. of the tribe of
Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.
after this I beheld and lo a great multitude which no man
could number of all nations and kindreds and people and
tongues stood before the throne and before the lamb clothed
with white robes and palms in their hands
and cried with a loud voice saying salvation to our God
which sitteth upon the throne and unto the lamb.
and all the angels stood round about the throne and about the
elders and the four beasts and fell before the throne on
their faces and worshipped God
saying Amen blessing and glory and wisdom and
thanksgiving and honour and power and might be unto our
God for ever and ever. Amen.
and one of the elders answered saying unto me what are these
which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?
and I said unto him Sir thou knowest. and he said to me
these are they which came out of great tribulation and have
washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the
lamb.
therefore are they before the throne of God and serve him day
and night in his temple and he that sitteth on the throne
shall dwell among them.
they shall hunger no more Neither thirst any more Neither
shall the sun light on them nor any heat.
for the lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed
them and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters and
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.
and when he had opened the seventh seal there was silence in
heaven about the space of half an hour.
and I saw the seven angels which stood before God and to them
were given seven trumpets.
and another angel came and stood at the altar having a golden
censer and there was given unto him Much incense that he
should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden
altar which was before the throne.
and the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of
the saints ascended up before God out of the angel s hand.
and the angel took the censer and filled it with fire of the
altar and cast it into the earth and there were voices and
thunderings and lightnings and an earthquake.
and the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared
themselves to sound.
the first angel sounded and there followed hail and fire
mingled with blood and they were cast upon the earth and the
third part of trees was burnt up and all green grass was
burnt up.
and the second angel sounded and as it were a great mountain
burning with fire was cast into the sea and the third part of
the sea became blood
and the third part of the creatures which were in the sea and
had life died and the third part of the ships were
destroyed.
and the third angel sounded and there fell a great star from
heaven burning as it were a lamp and it fell upon the third
part of the rivers and upon the fountains of waters
and the name of the star is called wormwood and the third
part of the waters became wormwood and many men died of the
waters because they were made bitter.
and the fourth angel sounded and the third part of the sun
was smitten and the third part of the moon and the third
part of the stars so as the third part of them was darkened
and the day shone not for a third part of it and the night
likewise.
and I beheld and heard an angel flying through the midst of
heaven saying with a loud voice woe woe woe to the
inhabiters of the earth by reason of the other voices of the
trumpet of the three angels which are yet to sound
and the fifth angel sounded and I saw a star fall from heaven
unto the earth and to him was given the key of the bottomless
pit.
and he opened the bottomless pit and there arose a smoke out
of the pit as the smoke of a great furnace and the sun and
the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.
and there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth and
unto them was given power as the scorpions of the earth have
power.
and it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass
of the earth Neither any green thing Neither any tree but
only those men which have not the seal of God in their
foreheads.
and to them it was given that they should not kill them but
that they should be tormented five months and their torment
was as the torment of a scorpion when he striketh a man.
and in those days shall men seek death and shall not find it
and shall desire to die and death shall flee from them.
and the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared
unto battle and on their heads were as it were crowns like
gold and their faces were as the faces of men.
and they had hair as the hair of women and their teeth were
as the teeth of lions.
and they had breastplates as it were breastplates of Iron
and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of
many horses running to battle.
and they had tails like unto scorpions and there were stings
in their tails and their power was to hurt men five months.
and they had a king over them which is the angel of the
bottomless pit whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon
but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon.
one woe is past and behold there come two woes more
hereafter.
and the sixth angel sounded and I heard a voice from the four
horns of the golden altar which is before God
saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet loose the
four angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates.
and the four angels were loosed which were prepared for an
hour and a day and a month and a year for to slay the
third part of men.
and the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred
thousand thousand and I heard the number of them.
and thus I saw the horses in the vision and them that sat on
them having breastplates of fire and of jacinth and
brimstone and the heads of the horses were as the heads of
lions and out of their mouths issued fire and smoke and
brimstone.
by these three was the third part of men killed by the fire
and by the smoke and by the brimstone which issued out of
their mouths.
for their power is in their mouth and in their tails for
their tails were like unto serpents and had heads and with
them they do hurt.
and the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues
yet repented not of the works of their hands that they should
not worship devils and idols of gold and Silver and brass
and stone and of wood which Neither can see nor hear nor
walk
Neither repented they of their murders nor of their
sorceries nor of their fornication nor of their Thefts.
and I saw another Mighty angel come down from heaven clothed
with a cloud and a rainbow was upon his head and his face
was as it were the sun and his feet as pillars of fire
and he had in his hand a little book open and he set his
right foot upon the sea and his left foot on the earth
and cried with a loud voice as when a lion roareth and when
he had cried seven thunders uttered their voices.
and when the seven thunders had uttered their voices I was
about to write and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto
me seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered and
write them not.
and the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the
earth lifted up his hand to heaven
and sware by him that liveth for ever and ever who created
heaven and the things that therein are and the earth and
the things that therein are and the sea and the things which
are therein that there should be time no longer
but in the days of the voice of the seventh angel when he
shall begin to sound the mystery of God should be finished
as he hath declared to his servants the prophets.
and the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again
and said go and take the little book which is open in the
hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the
earth.
and I went unto the angel and said unto him give me the
little book. and he said unto me take it and eat it up and
it shall make thy belly bitter but it shall be in thy mouth
sweet as honey.
and I took the little book out of the angel s hand and ate it
up and it was in my mouth sweet as honey and as soon as I
had eaten it my belly was bitter.
and he said unto me thou must prophesy again before many
peoples and nations and tongues and kings.
and there was given me a reed like unto a rod and the angel
stood saying rise and measure the temple of God and the
altar and them that worship therein.
but the court which is without the temple leave out and
measure it not for it is given unto the Gentiles and the
holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months.
and I will give power unto my two witnesses and they shall
prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed
in sackcloth.
these are the two olive trees and the two candlesticks
standing before the God of the earth.
and if any man will hurt them fire proceedeth out of their
mouth and devoureth their enemies and if any man will hurt
them he must in this manner be killed.
these have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the days
of their prophecy and have power over waters to turn them to
blood and to smite the earth with all plagues as often as
they will.
and when they shall have finished their testimony the beast
that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war
against them and shall overcome them and kill them.
and their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great
city which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt where also
our lord was crucified.
and they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations
shall see their dead bodies three days and an half and shall
not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.
and they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them
and make merry and shall send gifts one to another because
these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth.
and after three days and an half the spirit of life from God
entered into them and they stood upon their feet and great
fear fell upon them which saw them.
and they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them
come up hither. and they ascended up to heaven in a cloud and
their enemies beheld them.
and the same hour was there a great earthquake and the tenth
part of the city fell and in the earthquake were slain of men
seven thousand and the remnant were affrighted and gave
glory to the God of heaven.
the second woe is past and behold the third woe cometh
quickly.
and the seventh angel sounded and there were great voices in
heaven saying the kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our lord and of his Christ and he shall reign
for ever and ever.
and the four and twenty elders which sat before God on their
seats fell upon their faces and worshipped God
saying we give thee thanks O lord God almighty which art
and wast and art to come because thou hast taken to thee thy
great power and hast reigned.
and the nations were angry and thy wrath is come and the
time of the dead that they should be judged and that thou
shouldest give reward unto thy servants the prophets and to
the saints and them that fear thy name small and great and
shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth.
and the temple of God was opened in heaven and there was seen
in his temple the ark of his testament and there were
lightnings and voices and thunderings and an earthquake
and great hail.
and there appeared a great wonder in heaven a woman clothed
with the sun and the moon under her feet and upon her head a
crown of twelve stars
and she being with child cried travailing in birth and
pained to be delivered.
and there appeared another wonder in heaven and behold a
great red dragon having seven heads and Ten horns and seven
crowns upon his heads.
and his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven and
did cast them to the earth and the dragon stood before the
woman which was ready to be delivered for to devour her child
as soon as it was born.
and she brought forth a man child who was to rule all nations
with a rod of Iron and her child was caught up unto God and
to his throne.
and the woman fled into the wilderness where she hath a place
prepared of God that they should feed her there a thousand
two hundred and threescore days.
and there was war in heaven Michael and his angels fought
against the dragon and the dragon fought and his angels
and prevailed not Neither was their place found any more in
heaven.
and the great dragon was cast out that old serpent called
the devil and Satan which deceiveth the whole world he was
cast out into the earth and his angels were cast out with
him.
and I heard a loud voice saying in heaven now is come
salvation and strength and the kingdom of our God and the
power of his Christ for the accuser of our brethren is cast
down which accused them before our God day and night.
and they overcame him by the blood of the lamb and by the
word of their testimony and they loved not their lives unto
the death.
therefore rejoice ye heavens and ye that dwell in them. woe
to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea for the devil
is come down unto you having great wrath because he knoweth
that he hath but a short time.
and when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth he
persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child.
and to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle that
she might fly into the wilderness into her place where she
is nourished for a time and times and half a time from the
face of the serpent.
and the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after
the woman that he might cause her to be carried away of the
flood.
and the earth helped the woman and the earth opened her
mouth and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of
his mouth.
and the dragon was wroth with the woman and went to make war
with the remnant of her seed which keep the commandments of
God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.
and I stood upon the sand of the sea and saw a beast rise up
out of the sea having seven heads and Ten horns and upon his
horns Ten crowns and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.
and the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard and his
feet were as the feet of a bear and his mouth as the mouth of
a lion and the dragon gave him his power and his seat and
great authority.
and I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death and
his deadly wound was healed and all the world wondered after
the beast.
and they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the
beast and they worshipped the beast saying who is like unto
the beast? who is able to make war with him?
and there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and
blasphemies and power was given unto him to continue forty
and two months.
and he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God to blaspheme
his name and his tabernacle and them that dwell in heaven.
and it was given unto him to make war with the saints and to
overcome them and power was given him over all kindreds and
tongues and nations.
and all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him whose
names are not written in the book of life of the lamb slain
from the foundation of the world.
if any man have an ear let him hear.
he that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity he
that killeth with the sword must be killed with the sword.
here is the patience and the faith of the saints.
and I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth and he
had two horns like a lamb and he spake as a dragon.
and he exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him
and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship
the first beast whose deadly wound was healed.
and he doeth great wonders so that he maketh fire come down
from heaven on the earth in the sight of men
and deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of
those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the
beast saying to them that dwell on the earth that they
should make an image to the beast which had the wound by a
sword and did live.
and he had power to give life unto the image of the beast
that the image of the beast should both speak and cause that
as many as would not worship the image of the beast should be
killed.
and he causeth all both small and great rich and poor free
and bond to receive a Mark in their right hand or in their
foreheads
and that no man might buy or sell save he that had the Mark
or the name of the beast or the number of his name.
here is wisdom. let him that hath understanding count the
number of the beast for it is the number of a man and his
number is six hundred threescore and six.
and I looked and lo a lamb stood on the mount Sion and
with him an hundred forty and four thousand having his
father s name written in their foreheads.
and I heard a voice from heaven as the voice of many waters
and as the voice of a great thunder and I heard the voice of
harpers harping with their harps
and they sung as it were a new song before the throne and
before the four beasts and the elders and no man could learn
that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand which
were redeemed from the earth.
these are they which were not defiled with women for they are
virgins. these are they which follow the lamb whithersoever he
goeth. these were redeemed from among men being the
firstfruits unto God and to the lamb.
and in their mouth was found no guile for they are without
fault before the throne of God.
and I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven having the
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the
earth and to every nation and kindred and tongue and
people
saying with a loud voice fear God and give glory to him for
the hour of his judgment is come and worship him that made
heaven and earth and the sea and the fountains of waters.
and there followed another angel saying Babylon is fallen
is fallen that great city because she made all nations drink
of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.
and the third angel followed them saying with a loud voice
if any man worship the beast and his image and receive his
Mark in his forehead or in his hand
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God which is
poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation
and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the lamb
and the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever
and they have no rest day nor night who worship the beast and
his image and whosoever receiveth the Mark of his name.
here is the patience of the saints here are they that keep
the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.
and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me write blessed
are the dead which die in the lord from henceforth yea saith
the spirit that they may rest from their labours and their
works do follow them.
and I looked and behold a white cloud and upon the cloud one
sat like unto the son of man having on his head a golden
crown and in his hand a Sharp sickle.
and another angel came out of the temple crying with a loud
voice to him that sat on the cloud thrust in thy sickle and
reap for the time is come for thee to reap for the harvest
of the earth is ripe.
and he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the
earth and the earth was reaped.
and another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven
he also having a Sharp sickle.
and another angel came out from the altar which had power
over fire and cried with a loud cry to him that had the Sharp
sickle saying thrust in thy Sharp sickle and gather the
clusters of the vine of the earth for her grapes are fully
ripe.
and the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth and
gathered the vine of the earth and cast it into the great
winepress of the wrath of God.
and the winepress was trodden without the city and blood came
out of the winepress even unto the horse bridles by the
space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.
and I saw another sign in heaven great and marvellous seven
angels having the seven last plagues for in them is filled up
the wrath of God.
and I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire and
them that had gotten the victory over the beast and over his
image and over his Mark and over the number of his name
stand on the sea of glass having the harps of God.
and they sing the song of Moses the servant of God and the
song of the lamb saying great and marvellous are thy works
lord God almighty just and true are thy ways thou king of
saints.
who shall not fear thee O lord and glorify thy name? for
thou only art holy for all nations shall come and worship
before thee for thy judgments are made manifest.
and after that I looked and behold the temple of the
tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened
and the seven angels came out of the temple having the seven
plagues clothed in pure and white linen and having their
breasts girded with golden girdles.
and one of the four beasts gave unto the seven angels seven
golden vials full of the wrath of God who liveth for ever and
ever.
and the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God
and from his power and no man was able to enter into the
temple till the seven plagues of the seven angels were
fulfilled.
and I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the
seven angels go your ways and pour out the vials of the
wrath of God upon the earth.
and the first went and poured out his vial upon the earth
and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which
had the Mark of the beast and upon them which worshipped his
image.
and the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea and it
became as the blood of a dead man and every living soul died
in the sea.
and the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and
fountains of waters and they became blood.
and I heard the angel of the waters say thou art righteous O
lord which art and wast and shalt be because thou hast
judged thus.
for they have shed the blood of saints and prophets and thou
hast given them blood to drink for they are worthy.
and I heard another out of the altar say even so lord God
almighty true and righteous are thy judgments.
and the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun and
power was given unto him to scorch men with fire.
and men were scorched with great heat and blasphemed the name
of God which hath power over these plagues and they repented
not to give him glory.
and the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the
beast and his kingdom was full of darkness and they gnawed
their tongues for pain
and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and
their sores and repented not of their deeds.
and the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates and the water thereof was dried up that the way of
the kings of the east might be prepared.
and I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the
mouth of the dragon and out of the mouth of the beast and
out of the mouth of the false prophet.
for they are the spirits of devils working miracles which go
forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world to
gather them to the battle of that great day of God almighty.
behold I come as a thief. blessed is he that watcheth and
keepeth his garments lest he walk naked and they see his
shame.
and he gathered them together into a place called in the
Hebrew tongue Armageddon.
and the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air and
there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven from the
throne saying it is done.
and there were voices and thunders and lightnings and there
was a great earthquake such as was not since men were upon
the earth so Mighty an earthquake and so great.
and the great city was divided into three parts and the
cities of the nations fell and great Babylon came in
remembrance before God to give unto her the cup of the wine
of the fierceness of his wrath.
and every island fled away and the mountains were not found.
and there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven every
stone about the weight of a talent and men blasphemed God
because of the plague of the hail for the plague thereof was
exceeding great.
and there came one of the seven angels which had the seven
vials and talked with me saying unto me come hither I will
shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth
upon many waters
with whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication
and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the
wine of her fornication.
so he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness and I
saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast full of names
of blasphemy having seven heads and Ten horns.
and the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour and
decked with gold and precious stones and pearls having a
golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of
her fornication
and upon her forehead was a name written mystery Babylon the
great the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth.
and I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints and
with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus and when I saw her I
wondered with great admiration.
and the angel said unto me wherefore didst thou marvel? I
will tell thee the mystery of the woman and of the beast that
carrieth her which hath the seven heads and Ten horns.
the beast that thou sawest was and is not and shall ascend
out of the bottomless pit and go into perdition and they
that dwell on the earth shall wonder whose names were not
written in the book of life from the foundation of the world
when they behold the beast that was and is not and yet is.
and here is the mind which hath wisdom. the seven heads are
seven mountains on which the woman sitteth.
and there are seven kings five are fallen and one is and
the other is not yet come and when he cometh he must
continue a short space.
and the beast that was and is not even he is the eighth and
is of the seven and goeth into perdition.
and the Ten horns which thou sawest are Ten kings which have
received no kingdom as yet but receive power as kings one
hour with the beast.
these have one mind and shall give their power and strength
unto the beast.
these shall make war with the lamb and the lamb shall
overcome them for he is lord of lords and king of kings and
they that are with him are called and chosen and faithful.
and he saith unto me the waters which thou sawest where the
whore sitteth are peoples and multitudes and nations and
tongues.
and the Ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast these
shall hate the whore and shall make her desolate and naked
and shall eat her flesh and burn her with fire.
for God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will and to
agree and give their kingdom unto the beast until the words
of God shall be fulfilled.
and the woman which thou sawest is that great city which
reigneth over the kings of the earth.
and after these things I saw another angel come down from
heaven having great power and the earth was lightened with
his glory.
and he cried mightily with a strong voice saying Babylon the
great is fallen is fallen and is become the habitation of
devils and the hold of every foul spirit and a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird.
for all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication and the kings of the earth have committed
fornication with her and the merchants of the earth are waxed
rich through the abundance of her delicacies.
and I heard another voice from heaven saying come out of
her my people that ye be not partakers of her sins and that
ye receive not of her plagues.
for her sins have reached unto heaven and God hath remembered
her iniquities.
reward her even as she rewarded you and double unto her
double according to her works in the cup which she hath
filled fill to her double.
how Much she hath glorified herself and lived deliciously so
Much torment and sorrow give her for she saith in her heart
I sit a queen and Am no widow and shall see no sorrow.
therefore shall her plagues come in one day death and
mourning and famine and she shall be utterly burned with
fire for strong is the lord God who judgeth her.
and the kings of the earth who have committed fornication and
lived deliciously with her shall bewail her and lament for
her when they shall see the smoke of her burning
standing afar off for the fear of her torment saying alas
alas that great city Babylon that Mighty city for in one
hour is thy judgment come.
and the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her
for no man buyeth their merchandise any more
the merchandise of gold and Silver and precious stones and
of pearls and fine linen and purple and silk and scarlet
and all thyine wood and all manner vessels of ivory and all
manner vessels of most precious wood and of brass and Iron
and marble
and cinnamon and odours and ointments and frankincense and
wine and oil and fine flour and wheat and beasts and
sheep and horses and chariots and slaves and souls of men.
and the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from
thee and all things which were dainty and goodly are departed
from thee and thou shalt find them no more at all.
the merchants of these things which were made rich by her
shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment weeping and
wailing
and saying alas alas that great city that was clothed in
fine linen and purple and scarlet and decked with gold and
precious stones and pearls
for in one hour so great Riches is come to nought. and every
shipmaster and all the company in ships and sailors and as
many as trade by sea stood afar off
and cried when they saw the smoke of her burning saying what
city is like unto this great city
and they cast dust on their heads and cried weeping and
wailing saying alas alas that great city wherein were made
rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her
costliness for in one hour is she made desolate.
rejoice over her thou heaven and ye holy apostles and
prophets for God hath avenged you on her.
and a Mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone and
cast it into the sea saying thus with violence shall that
great city Babylon be thrown down and shall be found no more
at all.
and the voice of harpers and musicians and of pipers and
trumpeters shall be heard no more at all in thee and no
craftsman of whatsoever craft he be shall be found any more
in thee and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more
at all in thee
and the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee
and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be
heard no more at all in thee for thy merchants were the great
men of the earth for by thy sorceries were all nations
deceived.
and in her was found the blood of prophets and of saints and
of all that were slain upon the earth.
and after these things I heard a great voice of Much people in
heaven saying Alleluia salvation and glory and honour
and power unto the lord our God
for true and righteous are his judgments for he hath judged
the great whore which did corrupt the earth with her
fornication and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her
hand.
and again they said Alleluia and her smoke rose up for ever
and ever.
and the four and twenty elders and the four beasts fell down
and worshipped God that sat on the throne saying Amen
Alleluia.
and a voice came out of the throne saying praise our God
all ye his servants and ye that fear him both small and
great.
and I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude and as
the voice of many waters and as the voice of Mighty
thunderings saying Alleluia for the lord God omnipotent
reigneth.
let us be glad and rejoice and give honour to him for the
marriage of the lamb is come and his wife hath made herself
ready.
and to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine
linen clean and white for the fine linen is the
righteousness of saints.
and he saith unto me write blessed are they which are called
unto the marriage supper of the lamb. and he saith unto me
these are the true sayings of God.
and I fell at his feet to worship him. and he said unto me
see thou do it not I Am thy fellowservant and of thy
brethren that have the testimony of Jesus worship God for
the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.
and I saw heaven opened and behold a white horse and he that
sat upon him was called faithful and true and in
righteousness he doth judge and make war.
his eyes were as a flame of fire and on his head were many
crowns and he had a name written that no man knew but he
himself.
and he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood and his
name is called the word of God.
and the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white
horses clothed in fine linen white and clean.
and out of his mouth goeth a Sharp sword that with it he
should smite the nations and he shall rule them with a rod of
Iron and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and
wrath of almighty God.
and he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written
king of kings and lord of lords.
and I saw an angel standing in the sun and he cried with a
loud voice saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of
heaven come and gather yourselves together unto the supper of
the great God
that ye may eat the flesh of kings and the flesh of captains
and the flesh of Mighty men and the flesh of horses and of
them that sit on them and the flesh of all men both free and
bond both small and great.
and I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their
armies gathered together to make war against him that sat on
the horse and against his army.
and the beast was taken and with him the false prophet that
wrought miracles before him with which he deceived them that
had received the Mark of the beast and them that worshipped
his image. these both were cast alive into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone.
and the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon
the horse which sword proceeded out of his mouth and all the
fowls were filled with their flesh.
and I saw an angel come down from heaven having the key of
the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.
and he laid hold on the dragon that old serpent which is the
devil and Satan and bound him a thousand years
and cast him into the bottomless pit and shut him up and set
a seal upon him that he should deceive the nations no more
till the thousand years should be fulfilled and after that he
must be loosed a little season.
and I saw thrones and they sat upon them and judgment was
given unto them and I saw the souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus and for the word of God
and which had not worshipped the beast Neither his image
Neither had received his Mark upon their foreheads or in
their hands and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand
years.
but the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand
years were finished. this is the first resurrection.
blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first
resurrection on such the second death hath no power but they
shall be priests of God and of Christ and shall reign with
him a thousand years.
and when the thousand years are expired Satan shall be loosed
out of his prison
and shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four
quarters of the earth Gog and Magog to gather them together
to battle the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.
and they went up on the breadth of the earth and compassed
the camp of the saints about and the beloved city and fire
came down from God out of heaven and devoured them.
and the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone where the beast and the false prophet are
and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.
and I saw a great white throne and him that sat on it from
whose face the earth and the heaven fled away and there was
found no place for them.
and I saw the dead small and great stand before God and the
books were opened and another book was opened which is the
book of life and the dead were judged out of those things
which were written in the books according to their works.
and the sea gave up the dead which were in it and death and
hell delivered up the dead which were in them and they were
judged every man according to their works.
and death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. this is
the second death.
and whosoever was not found written in the book of life was
cast into the lake of fire.
and I saw a new heaven and a new earth for the first heaven
and the first earth were passed away and there was no more
sea.
and I John saw the holy city new Jerusalem coming down from
God out of heaven prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband.
and I heard a great voice out of heaven saying behold the
tabernacle of God is with men and he will dwell with them
and they shall be his people and God himself shall be with
them and be their God.
and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes and there
shall be no more death Neither sorrow nor crying Neither
shall there be any more pain for the former things are passed
away.
and he that sat upon the throne said behold I make all
things new. and he said unto me write for these words are
true and faithful.
and he said unto me it is done. I Am Alpha and Omega the
beginning and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst of
the fountain of the water of life freely.
he that overcometh shall inherit all things and I will be his
God and he shall be my son.
but the fearful and unbelieving and the abominable and
murderers and whoremongers and sorcerers and idolaters and
all liars shall have their part in the lake which burneth
with fire and brimstone which is the second death.
and there came unto me one of the seven angels which had the
seven vials full of the seven last plagues and talked with
me saying come hither I will shew thee the bride the
lamb s wife.
and he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high
mountain and shewed me that great city the holy Jerusalem
descending out of heaven from God
having the glory of God and her light was like unto a stone
most precious even like a jasper stone clear as crystal
and had a wall great and high and had twelve gates and at
the gates twelve angels and names written thereon which are
the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel
on the east three gates on the north three gates on the
south three gates and on the west three gates.
and the wall of the city had twelve foundations and in them
the names of the twelve apostles of the lamb.
and he that talked with me had a golden reed to measure the
city and the gates thereof and the wall thereof.
and the city lieth foursquare and the length is as large as
the breadth and he measured the city with the reed twelve
thousand furlongs. the length and the breadth and the height
of it are equal.
and he measured the wall thereof an hundred and forty and
four cubits according to the measure of a man that is of
the angel.
and the building of the wall of it was of jasper and the city
was pure gold like unto clear glass.
and the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished
with all manner of precious stones. the first foundation was
jasper the second sapphire the third a chalcedony the
fourth an emerald
the fifth sardonyx the sixth sardius the seventh
chrysolyte the eighth beryl the ninth a topaz the tenth
a chrysoprasus the eleventh a jacinth the twelfth an
amethyst.
and the twelve gates were twelve pearls every several gate
was of one pearl and the street of the city was pure gold as
it were transparent glass.
and I saw no temple therein for the lord God almighty and the
lamb are the temple of it.
and the city had no need of the sun Neither of the moon to
shine in it for the glory of God did lighten it and the lamb
is the light thereof.
and the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the
light of it and the kings of the earth do bring their glory
and honour into it.
and the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day for there
shall be no night there.
and they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into
it.
and there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defileth Neither whatsoever worketh abomination or maketh a
lie but they which are written in the lamb s book of life.
and he shewed me a pure river of water of life clear as
crystal proceeding out of the throne of God and of the lamb.
in the midst of the street of it and on either side of the
river was there the tree of life which bare twelve manner of
fruits and yielded her fruit every month and the leaves of
the tree were for the healing of the nations.
and there shall be no more curse but the throne of God and of
the lamb shall be in it and his servants shall serve him
and they shall see his face and his name shall be in their
foreheads.
and there shall be no night there and they need no candle
Neither light of the sun for the lord God giveth them light
and they shall reign for ever and ever.
and he said unto me these sayings are faithful and true and
the lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto
his servants the things which must shortly be done.
behold I come quickly blessed is he that keepeth the sayings
of the prophecy of this book.
and I John saw these things and heard them. and when I had
heard and seen I fell down to worship before the feet of the
angel which shewed me these things.
then saith he unto me see thou do it not for I Am thy
fellowservant and of thy brethren the prophets and of them
which keep the sayings of this book worship God.
and he saith unto me seal not the sayings of the prophecy of
this book for the time is at hand.
he that is unjust let him be unjust still and he which is
filthy let him be filthy still and he that is righteous let
him be righteous still and he that is holy let him be holy
still.
and behold I come quickly and my reward is with me to give
every man according as his work shall be.
I Am Alpha and Omega the beginning and the end the first and
the last.
blessed are they that do his commandments that they may have
right to the tree of life and may enter in through the gates
into the city.
for without are dogs and sorcerers and whoremongers and
murderers and idolaters and whosoever loveth and maketh a
lie.
I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things
in the churches. I Am the root and the offspring of David and
the bright and morning star.
and the spirit and the bride say come. and let him that
heareth say come. and let him that is athirst come. and
whosoever will let him take the water of life freely.
for I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the
prophecy of this book if any man shall add unto these things
God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this
book
and if any man shall take away from the words of the book of
this prophecy God shall take away his part out of the book of
life and out of the holy city and from the things which are
written in this book.
he which testifieth these things saith surely I come quickly.
Amen. even so come lord Jesus.
the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
